---
layout: post
title:  "25年9月新闻摘选"
date:   2025-09-10 11:23:00 +0800
---

<style type="text/css">
  pre code {
    white-space: pre-wrap;
    word-wrap: break-word;
    overflow-wrap: break-word;
  }
</style>

* 目录
{:toc #markdown-toc}

#### [Nepal prime minister quits after deaths at protests sparked by social media ban | Nepal | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/09/nepal-protests-social-media-ban-lifted-gen-z-kathmandu)

Nepal’s prime minister, KP Sharma Oli, has resigned after some of the worst unrest in decades rocked the country this week, set off by a ban on social media and **discontentment** at political corruption and **nepotism**.

The government decision to roll back the ban on sites such as Facebook, WhatsApp, YouTube and X late on Monday night did nothing to **quell** the anger among young people, who continued what was called the “Gen Z” protests.

In defiance of **curfews**, protests continued to erupt across the country on Tuesday and thousands stormed the federal parliament building in the capital, Kathmandu, and set it on fire. Car **tyres** were burned in the streets of Kathmandu and riot police were **pelted** with stones.

```
discontentment ~ noun ~ a feeling of wanting better treatment or an improved situation

nepotism ~ noun ~ the act of using your power or influence to get good jobs or unfair advantages for members of your own family

quell ~ verb ~ to stop something, especially by using force

curfew ~ noun ~ a rule that everyone must stay at home between particular times, usually at night, especially during a war or a period of political trouble

tyre ~ noun ~ a thick rubber ring, often filled with air, that is fitted around the outer edge of the wheel of a vehicle, allowing the vehicle to stick to the road surface and to travel over the ground more easily

pelt ~ verb ~ to throw a number of things quickly at someone or something
```

As calls for the resignation of Oli grew on Tuesday, his home was set **alight**, while homes of other prominent ministers and leaders and political offices were also attacked.

“Our prime minister, KP Sharma Oli, is extremely authoritarian and **egoistic**. As the guardian of the nation, he failed to stand on the side of the nation’s children. Now the entire generation will come after them.”

Amnesty International said live **ammunition** had been used against protesters on Monday, and the United Nations demanded a swift and transparent inquiry.

The ban on social media came after Nepal’s government gave social media firms a seven-day deadline to register under new regulations, including to establish a point of contact and **designate** resident grievance and compliance officers.

“The social media ban was not the only agenda of the Gen Z movement. The corruption that has **permeated** every level of the country must end,” said Raksha Bam, 26. “But instead of stopping that corruption, they shut down the civic space of our generation. That is why Gen Z gathered in one place.”

```
alight ~ adjective ~ burning

egoistic ~ adjective ~ considering yourself to be better or more important than other people

ammunition ~ noun ~ objects that can be shot from a weapon, such as bullets or bombs

designate ~ verb ~ to choose someone officially to do a particular job

permeate ~ verb ~ to spread through something and be present in every part of it
```

#### [Ukraine war briefing: Putin awards ‘courage’ medal to Russian general sought by ICC over alleged crimes against humanity in Ukraine | Ukraine | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/09/ukraine-war-briefing-putin-awards-courage-medal-to-russian-general-sought-by-icc-over-alleged-crimes-against-humanity-in-ukraine)

Army general Valery Gerasimov, chief of the general staff of Russia’s armed forces and one of the most powerful men in the Russian military, is **credited** as the chief architect of Russia’s modern warfare strategy.

The two are accused of the war crimes of directing attacks at civilian objects and of causing excessive **incidental** harm to civilians or damage to civilian objects, and are also accused of crimes against humanity.

The Order of Courage, a **prestigious** state decoration, was given to him “for courage, bravery and **dedication** displayed in the fulfilment of military duty”, according to a decree published on Russia’s official legal acts website late on Monday.

Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskyy’s **chief of staff**, Andriy Yermak, said he discussed Sunday’s attack – the first of its kind in the war – with US secretary of state Marco Rubio on Monday.

While visiting the building, the European Union’s ambassador to Ukraine, Katarina Mathernova, noted the “**gaping** hole” left by the impact and missile **remnants** and said: “It’s only because the missile was unable to fully **detonate** that the entire building wasn’t turned into ruins.”

```
credit ~ verb ~ praise, approval, or honour

incidental ~ adjective ~ less important than the thing something is connected with or part of

prestigious ~ adjective ~ very much respected and admired, usually because of being important

dedication ~ noun ~ the willingness to give a lot of time and energy to something because it is important

gaping ~ adjective ~ A gaping hole or other opening is very large.

remnant ~ noun ~ a small piece or amount of something that is left from a larger original piece or amount

detonate ~ verb ~ to (cause something to) explode
```

#### [Trump asks EU to impose tariffs of up to 100% on India and China | Russia | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/10/trump-asks-eu-to-impose-high-tariffs-on-india-and-china-to-put-pressure-on-russia)

The move by Trump follows Putin strengthening his relationship with his Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, and India’s prime minister, Narenda Modi, at a **showpiece** summit in China.

```
showpiece ~ noun ~ an extremely good example of something that deserves to be admired
```

#### [Anti-Islamic biker gang members hired to run security at controversial Gaza aid sites | Gaza | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/10/anti-islamic-biker-gang-infidels-mc-gaza-aid-sites)

The investigation found that more than 10 members of Infidels MC, a US biker gang that uses the **Crusader** cross as its symbol and whose members have anti-Islamic **tattoos**, have been hired by UG Solutions and deployed to food aid sites run by the Gaza Humanitarian Foundation.

Mulford, whose **affiliation** with GHF was public, accidentally sent an email to the BBC telling other leaders of the group not to comment on inquiries – inadvertently revealing the identities of several other senior **Infidels** members also working for UG Solutions.

GHF’s operations have come under scrutiny as the US and Israeli-backed group has **supplanted** nearly every other major humanitarian organisation working in the Gaza Strip in what critics have called a deliberate effort to politicise humanitarian aid.

“We do not **screen** for personal hobbies or affiliations unrelated to job performance or security standards.”

In a statement to the Guardian, GHF said: “The Gaza Humanitarian Foundation maintains a strict zero-tolerance policy toward any form of hateful or **discriminatory** behavior.”

```
Crusader ~ noun ~ a Christian who fought in one of the religious wars of the 11th, 12th, 13th, and 17th centuries, mostly against Muslims in Palestine

tattoo ~ noun ~ a permanent image, pattern, or word on the skin that is created by using needles to put colours under the skin

affiliation ~ noun ~ a connection with a political party or religion, or with a larger organization

Infidel ~ noun  ~ (used especially between Christians and Muslims) someone who does not have the same religious beliefs as the person speaking

supplant ~ verb ~ to replace

screen ~ verb ~ to test or examine someone or something to discover if there is anything wrong with him, her, or it

discriminatory ~ adjective ~ treating a person or group differently from and usually worse than other people, because of their race, gender, sexuality, etc.
```

#### [Israeli airstrikes ‘killed any hope’ for hostages in Gaza, says Qatari prime minister | Israel | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/10/israel-threats-outrage-qatar-strike-hamas)

Netanyahu has responded **defiantly** to international criticism for the attack, including a White House statement that the “unilateral bombing” inside Qatar “does not advance Israel or America’s goals.”

Hamas said in a statement that all of its leaders were safe, but five lower-ranked members were reportedly killed. A senior Israeli official admitted on Wednesday that optimism about the success of the strikes was **waning**.

“Why does the prime minister insist on blowing up every small chance for a deal? Why? The people of Israel are tired of this war. End it **already** and bring everyone back,” said Einav Zangauker, whose son Matan was kidnapped from his **kibbutz**.

Successive polls have shown broad support in Israel for a deal to end the war and free the hostages, while Netanyahu has been accused of prolonging the conflict for political **ends**.

“In Israel … the vast majority of the people now are in favour of ending the war and bringing back the hostages … So that might look like the concluding **remarks** of the war,” Nadan said.

Meanwhile in Sana’a, people said Wednesday’s attack had struck a **hideout** between two mountains that was used as a command-and-control headquarters. The extent of any damage was not immediately clear.

```
defiantly ~ adverb ~ in a way that proudly refuses to obey authority

wane ~ verb ~ to become weaker in strength or influence

kibbutz ~ noun ~ a farm or factory in Israel where profits and duties are shared and all work is considered equally important

end ~ noun ~ an aim, intention, or purpose

remark ~ noun ~ something that you say, giving your opinion about something or stating a fact

hideout ~ noun ~ a secret place where someone can go when they do not want to be found by other people
```

#### [Ukraine war briefing: Cheap Shahed-like Gerbera drones used in Poland violation | Ukraine | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/11/ukraine-war-briefing-cheap-shahed-like-gerbera-drones-used-in-poland-violation)

It is made of materials like **plywood** and **foam**, and driven by a **motor** and propeller at the back.

Ukrainian and western analysts say Russia uses the Gerbera as a decoy to **saturate** Ukraine’s air defences. China denies shipping **wares** to Russia for use against Ukraine.

Ukraine had presented proposals for joint protection of European airspace “in a coordinated, **well-thought-out**, joint way …

The UK will **mass** produce low-cost Ukrainian-designed interceptor drones to help Ukraine fight off Russian UAV attacks.

Indian buyers are demanding bigger discounts on Russian crude oil because of the risk posed by dodging the international price cap, oil industry analysts have told Reuters – with some Russian sellers responding by saying they will send oil **cargoes** to China instead.

The EU has lowered the price cap for Russian oil from October to 47.60 a **barrel**, down from 60. Richard Bronze is the head of geopolitics at **consultancy** Energy Aspects. The EU was considering a faster **phase-out** of Russian fossil fuels as part of new sanctions.

```
plywood ~ noun ~ wood that consists of several thin layers of wood stuck together

foam ~ noun ~ a mass of very small bubbles formed on the surface of a liquid

motor ~ noun ~ a device that changes electricity or fuel into movement and makes a machine work

saturate ~ verb ~ to make something or someone completely wet

ware ~ noun ~ used, often in shops, to refer to objects of the same material or type, especially things used in cooking and serving food

mass ~ adjective ~ having an effect on or involving a large number of people or forming a large amount

cargo ~ noun ~ the goods carried by a ship, aircraft, or other large vehicle

barrel ~ noun ~ a large container, made of wood, metal, or plastic, with a flat top and bottom and curved sides that make it fatter in the middle

consultancy ~ noun ~ a company that gives advice on a particular subject
```

The US Congress still needs to **sign off** on the transaction.

#### [Venezuela says 11 killed in US boat strike were not gang members amid reports vessel was returning to shore | Venezuela | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/11/venezuela-boat-strike-tren-de-aragua-trump)

The emerging details came as several senators, Democrats and some Republicans, indicated dissatisfaction with the administration’s **rationale** and questioned the legality of the action.

“Our armed forces are not law enforcement agencies,” said Senator Jack Reed, the top Democrat on the Senate Armed Services Committee, in a floor speech this week.

Kelly also said Nicolás Maduro was not the legitimate president of Venezuela and that he was a “**fugitive**”.

“This strike sent a clear message: If you traffic drugs toward our shores, the United States military will use every tool at our **disposal** to stop you cold,“ chief Pentagon spokesperson Sean Parnell said.

```
rationale ~ noun ~ the reasons or intentions that cause a particular set of beliefs or actions

fugitive ~ noun ~ a person who is running away or hiding from the police or a dangerous situation

disposal ~ noun ~ the act of getting rid of something, especially by throwing it away
```

#### [Ukraine war briefing: ‘Wasn’t a mistake’ – Poland’s reply after Trump speculates on drones | Ukraine | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/12/ukraine-war-briefing-wasnt-a-mistake-polands-reply-after-trump-speculates-on-drones)

An emergency session of the UN security council will convene on Friday at Poland’s request as **Warsaw** seeks to rally support after the Russian drone incursion, write Shaun Walker and Jakub Krupa.

Poland’s PM, Donald Tusk, announced the closure on Tuesday because of the “very aggressive” Zapad military exercises being conducted by Belarus and Russia as well as a growing number of provocations from the **dictatorial** allies.

Thousands gathered at the **Slovak** capital, **Bratislava**, on Thursday, in part to protest about last week’s meeting between their pro-Putin prime minister, Robert Fico, and the Russian president in Beijing.

“We’re sanctioning actors involved in chemical weapons and disinformation, as well as shadow fleet vessels, alternative payment providers, and third-country **facilitators** in North Korea and Iran.”

```
dictatorial ~ adjective ~ liking to give orders

facilitator ~ noun ~ someone who helps a person or organization do something more easily or find the answer to a problem, by discussing things and suggesting ways of doing things
```

#### [Prince Harry makes surprise visit to Ukraine pledging support for thousands injured in war | Prince Harry | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2025/sep/12/prince-harry-ukraine-visit-kyiv)

He added: “We can continue to **humanise** the people involved in this war and what they are going through. I hope this trip will help to bring it home to people because it’s easy to become **desensitised** to what has been going on.”

The prince said he was initially invited to Kyiv by Olga Rudnieva, the founder and CEO of the Superhumans Trauma Centre in Lviv, Ukraine which treats wounded **amputees**.

“I **bumped** into Olga in New York."

“It was **remarkable**. Everyone felt an **immense** connection to them.”

While the **biennial** Invictus Games have been the focal point of much of the foundation’s work.

By March this year, more than 22,000 veterans across Ukraine had accessed benefits like **gym** memberships and pool passes.

```
humanise ~ verb ~ to make something less unpleasant and more suitable for people

desensitise ~ verb ~ to cause someone to experience something, usually an emotion or a pain, less strongly than before

amputee ~ noun ~ a person who has had an arm or leg cut off

bump ~ verb ~ to hit something with force

remarkable ~ adjective ~ unusual or special and therefore surprising and worth mentioning

immense ~ adjective ~ extremely large in size or degree

biennial ~ adjective ~ happening once every two years

gym ~ noun ~ a place or club where you can go to exercise using machines, weights, and other equipment
```

#### [Mexico acting ‘under coercion to constrain’ China with 50% tariff on cars, says Beijing | China | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/12/mexico-acting-under-coercion-to-constrain-china-with-50-tariff-on-cars-says-beijing)

However analysts suggested it was also designed to **placate** Donald Trump, who has been pressuring Mexico not to act as a “back door” for Chinese goods into the US.

On Thursday, China’s ministry of foreign affairs said Beijing “firmly rejects moves that are taken under coercion to constrain China or undermine China’s legitimate rights and interests under any **pretext**”.

“We will firmly protect our rights and interests **in light of** the developments of the situation,” foreign ministry spokesperson Lin Jian told a regular briefing.

Trump’s tariff regime has **upended** ties and alliances around the world – having moved beyond its original stated purpose of rebalancing trade relationships in the US’s favour, to being **wielded** as a geopolitical tool.

The supreme court is set to hear Trump’s appeal against that **verdict** in the first week of November and the tariffs remain in place ahead of its ruling.

```
placate ~ verb ~ to stop someone from feeling angry

pretext ~ noun ~ a pretended reason for doing something that is used to hide the real reason

upend ~ verb ~ to push or move something so that the part that usually touches the ground is not touching the ground any more

wield ~ verb ~ to hold a weapon or tool and look as if you are going to use it

verdict ~ noun ~ an opinion or decision made after judging the facts that are given, especially one made at the end of a trial
```

#### [North Korea executes citizens who distribute foreign TV shows, UN finds | North Korea | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/12/north-korea-executes-citizens-distribute-foreign-tv-shows-un-finds)

Surveillance has grown more **pervasive** since 2014 with the help of new technologies.

“They’re often children from the lower level of society, because they’re the ones who can’t **bribe** their way out of it, and these **shock brigades** are engaged in often very hazardous and dangerous work,” said Heenan.

```
pervasive ~ adjective ~ present or noticeable in every part of a thing or place

bribe ~ verb ~ to try to make someone do something for you by giving them money, presents, or something else that they want
```

#### [US and China reach deal to transfer TikTok ownership, trade officials say | TikTok | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2025/sep/15/trump-china-tiktok-sale-ban)

“We would like to stress that the outcomes of the trade and economic consultations are **hard won**” Li said in Madrid.

The Department of Justice last year said TikTok had gathered the sensitive data of American users based off gun control, **abortion** and religion through its use of Lark, a workplace communication platform similar to Slack or Microsoft Teams, according to court documents.

Security experts have long pointed to three main areas of concern: Chinese influence campaigns, mass data collection on US citizens, and potential vulnerabilities that could **compromise** users’ devices.

The TikTok ownership saga stretches back to 2020, when Trump first ordered ByteDance to **divest** TikTok or face a shutdown. Microsoft initially pursued a potential **acquisition** worth billions of dollars, with CEO Satya Nadella engaging directly with Trump, but it fell apart in what Nadella dubbed at the time “the strangest deal” he has ever worked on.

Soon after, Walmart and Oracle came close to buying TikTok’s US **arm**, proposing a joint acquisition of a new entity called TikTok Global, but it was shelved indefinitely after the Biden administration conducted its own review of Chinese tech companies.

“We’re not going to be in the business of having **repetitive** extensions,” Greer said. “We have a deal.”

```
abortion ~ noun ~ the intentional ending of a pregnancy

compromise ~ verb ~ to allow your principles to be less strong or your standards or morals to be lower

divest ~ verb ~ to sell something, especially a business or a part of a business

arm ~ noun ~ a long, moving part of a machine or piece of equipment

repetitive ~ adjective ~ involving doing or saying the same thing several times, especially in a way that is boring:
```

#### [Chinese economy slows amid Trump trade war and weaker consumer spending | Chinese economy | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/business/2025/sep/15/chinese-economy-weakens-as-consumer-spending-and-factory-output-slows)

The disappointing data adds pressure on Beijing to roll out more stimulus to fend off a sharp slowdown, with a debt crisis denting the country’s once-booming property sector and exports facing stronger **headwinds**.

A spokesperson for China’s statistics bureau said on Monday that more efforts were needed to support China’s **ailing** property sector and that the “external environment is very severe”.

Although the two countries agreed a pause on tariffs until 10 November, China recorded a **slump** in US-bound exports last month.

“The activity data point to a further loss of **momentum**,” Zichun Huang, China economist at Capital Economics, wrote in a note.

Authorities are leaning on manufacturers to find new markets to **offset** Trump’s unpredictable tariff policies and weak consumer spending.

“Policies and measures to support service consumption are expected to offset the impact of **aggregate** demand this month,” he said.

```
headwind ~ noun ~ a wind blowing in the opposite direction to the one you are moving in

ailing ~ adjective ~ experiencing difficulty and problems

slump ~ verb ~ (of prices, values, or sales) to fall suddenly

momentum ~ noun ~ the force that keeps an object moving

offset ~ verb ~ to balance one influence against an opposing influence, so that there is no great difference as a result

aggregate ~ adjective ~ total
```

#### [Israel launches ground offensive deep inside Gaza City | Gaza | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/16/israel-launches-ground-offensive-deep-inside-gaza-city)

“We will not **relent** until the mission is completed.”

They estimated that the invading force would be met by up to 3,000 Hamas and **allied** fighters, and said the Israeli forces would advance cautiously.

“This phase is defined by a coordinated and gradual manoeuvre combining precise intelligence, air and ground forces targeting Hamas’s central stronghold and aimed at dismantling its **grip** in this area.”

“It is clear that there is an intent to destroy the Palestinians in Gaza through acts that meet the **criteria** set forth in the genocide convention,” said Navi Pillay.

```
relent ~ verb ~ to act in a less severe way towards someone and allow something that you had refused to allow before

allied ~ adjective ~ connected by a political or military agreement

grip ~ verb ~ to hold very tightly

criteria ~ plural of criterion ~ noun ~ a standard by which you judge, decide about, or deal with something

suspend ~ verb ~ to stop something from being active, either temporarily or permanently
```

“**Suspending** trade concessions and imposing sanctions on extremist ministers and violent settlers would clearly signal that the EU demands an end to this war,” she said.

Netanyahu sought to brace the country for greater economic isolation in a speech on Monday in which he said it would have to “adapt to an economy with **autarkic** features”, suggesting it would have to be more self-reliant with fewer trade options.

Tess Ingram, a spokesperson for the UN child protection agency, Unicef, said there was no safe **haven** for the displaced population.

“It is inhumane to expect nearly half a million children, battered and **traumatised** by over 700 days of unrelenting conflict, to flee one **hellscape** and end up in another.”.

His critics have long argued he has prolonged the Gaza war to put off elections, stay in office and thereby preserve his legal **immunity**.

```
autarkic ~ adjective ~ of countries; not relying on imports

haven ~ noun ~ a safe or peaceful place

traumatise ~ verb ~ to shock and upset someone severely and for a long time

hellscape ~ noun ~ an area that looks extremely unpleasant, especially because everything there has been destroyed, or a picture that represents this

immunity ~ noun ~ a situation in which you are protected against disease or from legal action
```

Once the ground offensive was launched, Donald Trump directed blame at Hamas, telling reporters at the White House that the militants would have “**hell to pay**” if it used the surviving hostages as human shields during the assault.

#### [‘Everyone should be worried’: life in the crosshairs of China’s ‘Guam killer’ missiles | Guam | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/17/guam-reacts-to-china-displaying-new-killer-missile-everyone-should-be-worried)

But that certainty shifted slightly this month when the threat **catapulted** into the headlines, as Beijing used a military parade commemorating Japan’s defeat in the second world war to unveil a range of new military hardware – including a weapon dubbed the “Guam Killer” by Chinese media.

For that reason, displays of China’s increasing military **prowess** – this month’s event included nuclear-capable intercontinental ballistic missiles, anti-drone **lasers** and four-legged “robot wolves” – **loom** large in the territory.

“Guam should be aware of the threat, even if not so worried,” says Col Grant Newsham, a retired US marine officer, noting that the Chinese military has **outpace** the US in some areas.

“That can alter regional and global diplomacy and make coordinated actions more likely. It’s alarming because it can be a military and security **allegiance**,” Reilly says.

Local officials, however, continue to insist that defending Guam is of **paramount** importance to the US military.

```
catapult ~ verb ~ to throw someone or something with great force

prowess ~ noun ~ great ability or skill

laser ~ noun ~ (a device that produces) a powerful, narrow beam of light that can be used as a tool to cut metal, to perform medical operations, or to create patterns of light for entertainment

loom ~ verb ~ to appear as a large, often frightening or unclear shape or object

outpace ~ verb ~ to move or develop faster than someone or something else

allegiance ~ noun ~ loyalty and support for a ruler, country, group, or belief

paramount ~ adjective ~ more important than anything else
```

#### [Ukraine war briefing: Russian oil system struggling under Ukrainian attacks – report | World news | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/17/ukraine-war-briefing-russian-oil-system-struggling-under-ukrainian-attacks-report)

Von der Leyen announced the commission would soon present its 19th package of sanctions aimed at Russia’s war effort – targeting **crypto**, banks, and energy.

Europe has in fact greatly reduced its purchase of Russian oil and gas, though two big **holdouts** are Hungary and Slovakia, whose rightwing prime ministers are both friendly with Putin and Trump.

The editorial listed how Trump’s promises and threats concerning the Ukraine war have all failed to produce results – including how “an 8 August deadline for Mr Putin to agree to a ceasefire somehow **morphed** into a red carpet welcome in Alaska”.

A Russian drone, missile or **glide** bomb hit an educational building in Kharkiv city’s southern Slobidskyi district on Tuesday. Some reports described the building as the pharmaceutical university.

A Ukrainian arrested in Italy last month over the 2022 sabotage of the Nord Stream gas pipelines from Russia to Europe must be **extradited** to Germany, a court in Bologna ruled on Tuesday. The man, identified as Serhii K, has denied taking part and will appeal against his **extradition** to Italy’s supreme court, his lawyer said.

```
crypto ~ noun ~ short form of cryptocurrency ~ a digital currency produced by a public network, rather than any government, that uses cryptography to make sure payments are sent and received safely

holdout ~ noun ~ a person, organization, or country that continues to do something, despite other people trying to force them not to

morph ~ verb ~ to gradually change, or change someone or something, from one thing to another

glide ~ verb ~ to fly by floating on air currents instead of using power from wings or an engine

pharmaceutical ~ adjective ~ relating to the production of medicines

extradite ~ verb ~ to make someone return for trial to another country or state where they have been accused of doing something illegal
```

#### [EU calls for closer ties with India despite Modi’s links to Russia | European Union | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/17/eu-calls-for-closer-ties-with-india-despite-modi-ties-to-russia)

Meanwhile the EU is **grappling** with demands from Trump to impose up to 100% tariffs on India and China, another buyer of Russian oil, to pressure Russia to end the war.

But privately, officials have **balked** at 100% tariffs, at a time when Brussels is also trying to sign a trade agreement with India by the end of the year.

Asked about the link between the trade talks and India’s relations with Russia, Kallas said: “Negotiations are negotiations and until we agree about everything then nothing is agreed.” She added that the EU had to take into account its interests, concerns and “**problematic** issues”.

But he was also **downbeat** about the latest round of trade talks, saying he had hoped to see more progress in meetings last week.

The commission is **racing** to strike trade deals around the world since Trump hit many European goods with tariffs and pressured the EU into an unequal trade agreement.

He said that a commitment to the 2026 deadline would “establish a clear timeline, and demonstrate our resolve to achieve independence from oil supplies **burdened** with political and strategic risks”.

```
grapple ~ verb ~ to fight, especially in order to win something

balk ~ verb ~ to be unwilling to do something or to allow something to happen

problematic ~ adjective ~ full of problems or difficulties

downbeat ~ adjective ~ lacking in excitement or hope

race ~ verb ~ to move or go fast

burden ~ verb ~ to make someone responsible for something that is very difficult, unpleasant, or expensive to deal with
```

#### [Trump celebrates TikTok deal as Beijing suggests US app would use China’s algorithm | China | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/17/trump-celebrates-tiktok-deal-as-beijing-suggests-us-app-would-use-chinas-algorithm)

At a press conference in Madrid, the deputy head of China’s cyber security **regulator** said the framework of the deal included “**licensing** the algorithm and other intellectual property rights”.

Wang Jingtao said ByteDance would “**entrust** the operation of TikTok’s US user data and content security.”

Some commentators have inferred from these comments that TikTok’s US **spinoff** will retain the Chinese algorithm.

At arguments in the Supreme Court in January, a lawyer for TikTok ByteDance told the justices how difficult it would be to sell the platform to a US company, because Chinese law restricts the sale of the **proprietary** algorithm that has made the social media platform wildly successful.

American officials have previously warned the algorithm that **fuels** what users see on the app is vulnerable to manipulation by Chinese authorities, who can use it to shape content on the platform in a way that’s difficult to detect.

“It wouldn’t be in **compliance** if the algorithm is Chinese. There can’t be any shared algorithm with ByteDance,” said a spokesperson for the House Select Committee on China.

```
regulator ~ noun ~ an official who makes certain that the companies who operate a system, such as the national electricity supply, work effectively and fairly

license ~ verb ~ to give someone official permission to do or have something

entrust ~ verb ~ to give someone a thing or a duty for which they are responsible

spinoff ~ noun ~ a product that develops from another more important product

proprietary ~ adjective ~ relating to owning something, or relating to or like an owner

fuel ~ verb ~ to increase a feeling or a type of behaviour or make it stronger

compliance ~ noun ~ the act of doing everything that someone tells or wants you to do
```

#### [Venezuela starts days of military and ‘electronic warfare’ drills after US strikes on alleged drug boats | Venezuela | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/18/venezuela-military-exercises-after-us-boat-attacks-kill-14-people)

Venezuela says it has begun three days of military exercises on its Caribbean island of La Orchila as tensions **soar** amid US military activity in the region.

The exercise ordered by Maduro as commander-in-chief was **baptised** “Sovereign Caribbean”, said the defence minister, Vladimir Padrino López.

“There will be air defence deployments with armed drones, surveillance drones, submarine drones ... We are going to implement electronic warfare actions,” he said on Wednesday, citing the “threatening, **vulgar** voice” of the US.

Public television showed images of **amphibious** vessels and warships deployed off La Orchila, where Venezuela has a military base.

The US government has released videos of two of the boat strikes and claims it has **irrefutable** evidence the people killed were US-bound traffickers, without providing details to back up the claims.

```
soar ~ verb ~ to rise very quickly to a high level

baptise ~ verb ~ to rise very quickly to a high level

vulgar ~ adjective ~ rude and likely to upset or anger people, especially by referring to sex and the body in an unpleasant way

amphibious ~ adjective ~ of or relating to animals that lives both on land and in water

irrefutable ~ adjective ~ impossible to prove wrong
```

#### [China’s ‘temple economy’ in the spotlight as scandals rock influential religious leaders | China | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/18/chinas-temple-economy-in-the-spotlight-as-scandals-rock-influential-religious-leaders)

For a religious leader, the allegations were scandalous. Mistresses, **illegitimate** children, embezzlement. But in 2015, the head **abbott** of Shaolin monastery, the **cradle** of **Zen Buddhism** and kung-fu in China, was untouchable.

The Shaolin Temple released a statement saying that he was being investigated for allegedly **misappropriating** funds and for fathering illegitimate children with multiple mistresses.

```
illegitimate ~ adjective ~ born of parents not married to each other

abbot ~ noun ~ a man who is in charge of a monastery

cradle ~ noun ~ a small bed for a baby, especially one that moves from side to side

misappropriate ~ verb ~ to steal something that you have been trusted to take care of and use it for your own good
```

The controversies reveal the increasingly **precarious** position of influential religious leaders in China, as the official support for the commercialisation of religious sites gives way to an emphasis on **frugality** and political **obedience**.

Wu is accused of **soliciting** public donations under the guise of collecting money for unmarried pregnant women and needy children, which was actually spent on personal **extravagances**.

```
precarious ~ adjective ~ in a dangerous state because of not being safe or not being held in place firmly

frugality ~ noun ~ the quality of being careful when using money or food

obedience ~ noun ~ the fact that people or animals do what they are told to do

solicit ~ verb ~ to ask someone for money, information, or help

extravagance ~ noun ~ behaviour in which you spend more money than you need to
```

In August, a video of monks from Hangzhou’s Lingyin Temple sitting around a table counting **wads** of cash went viral, catapulting the 4th century hall of **worship** into a social media storm.

In **medieval** times, monasteries stood in for banks, loaning cash to **merchants** while charging high interest rates.

The **opprobrium** comes from ordinary people who see riches as being spiritually **corrosive**, and, increasingly, from the government, which under the leadership of Xi Jinping has cracked down on excess wealth and corruption.

```
wad ~ noun ~ a number of usually flat and/or small objects pressed tightly together

worship ~ noun ~ the act of worshipping God or a god, often through praying or singing

medieval ~ adjective ~ related to the Middle Ages (= the period in European history from about AD 600 to AD 1500)

merchant ~ noun ~ a person whose job is to buy and sell products in large amounts, especially by trading with other countries

opprobrium ~ noun ~ severe criticism and blame

corrosive ~ adjective ~ A corrosive substance causes damage by chemical action.
```

But as China entered a period of economic reform and opening up in the 1980s, temples were back in **vogue**, with many turning to tourism to support themselves, often with explicit government support.

Gift shops selling Shaolin-branded **merchandise** also opened, and Shaolin **Inc** was born.

Over the years he took a **troupe** of **martial** arts monks to Moscow for a special performance at the invitation of Vladimir Putin. It led one worker near the Shaolin monastery to remark that the political **heft** of local CCP officials seemed **paltry** in comparison with Shi.

```
vogue ~ noun ~ a fashion or general liking, especially one that is temporary

merchandise ~ noun ~ goods that are bought and sold

troupe ~ noun ~ a group of performers such as singers or dancers who work and travel together

martial ~ adjective ~ relating to soldiers, war, or life in the armed forces

heft ~ noun ~ the weight of something

paltry ~ adjective ~ (of an amount of money) very small and of little or no value
```

As China suffers with **stubbornly** sluggish economic growth, temples in theory are a gift to both local governments and ordinary people. The authorities benefit from increased domestic spending as people flock to temple-**cum**-tourist attractions, while people struggling to find work or fulfilment in Chinese society are increasingly turning to religion for spiritual guidance.

But temples also must **tread** an increasingly narrow line between popularity and political obedience.

“It’s almost always that there is something else going on that has to do with **patronage**,” says Ian Johnson, the author of The Souls of China, a book about religion in China.

Xi has shown a particular interest in traditional Chinese religions. Early in his career he helped to re-open important Buddhist temples and turn them into tourist attractions, a blueprint for how the officially **atheist** Party could work with religion.

```
stubbornly ~ adverb ~ in a way that shows you are determined to do what you want and refuse to do anything else

cum ~ prep ~ used for linking two nouns

tread ~ verb ~ to put your foot on something or to press something down with your foot

patronage ~ noun ~ the support given to an organization by someone

atheist ~ noun ~ someone who does not believe in any god or gods, or who believes that no god or gods exist
```

Now it seems that the Shaolin monastery, set in the **jagged** Song mountain range, is being brought to heel. He **halted** commercial performances, banned expensive **consecration** rituals, said he would remove temple shops and said that he would eliminate other unpopular fees.

But so far, the anti-commercialisation drive is **patchy** at best. Yellow-robed monks stage daily, **spellbinding** martial arts that are free – for anyone who has bought an 80 yuan ticket to the temple complex.

It would not have been known internationally … there are **pros and cons**.

“After all, I’d also want to drive a range **rover**”.

```
jagged ~ adjective ~ rough and with sharp points

halt ~ verb ~ to (cause to) stop moving or doing something or happening

consecration ~ noun ~ the act or process of officially making something holy and able to be used for religious ceremonies

patchy ~ adjective ~ only existing or happening in some parts

spellbinding ~ adjective ~ holding your attention completely

rover ~ noun ~ a person who spends their time travelling from place to place
```

#### [Saudi Arabia and Pakistan sign mutual defence pact as regional tensions escalate | Saudi Arabia | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/18/saudi-arabia-pakistan-mutual-defence-pact)

“This is not a response to specific countries or specific events but an **institutionalisation** of longstanding and deep cooperation between our two countries.”

The pact on Wednesday could shift the strategic **calculus** in a complex region. Gulf **monarchies** – allies of Washington – have sought to stabilise ties with both Iran and Israel to resolve longstanding security concerns.

```
institutionalisation ~ noun ~ to make something become a permanent or respected part of a society, system, or organization

calculus ~ noun ~ calculation

monarchy ~ noun ~ a country that has a king or queen
```

#### [UK preparing to recognise Palestinian state as early as Friday | Palestinian territories | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/18/uk-preparing-to-recognise-palestinian-state-as-early-as-friday)

The leadership of the Palestinian Authority is **subject to** elections within a year.

The UK prime minister said recognition was “part of that overall package which hopefully takes us from the **appalling** situation we’re in now to the outcome of a safe and secure Israel, which we do not have, and a viable Palestinian state”.

The UK Foreign Office had long **parried** calls for recognition, saying the step should only be taken when it had maximum impact on the peace process.

These included a resumption of humanitarian aid, a ceasefire, Israeli engagement in a **sustained** peace process, and no further Israeli land annexations in the West Bank.

```
appalling ~ adjective ~ shocking and very bad

parry ~ verb ~ to manage cleverly to avoid dealing with a difficult question or some criticism

sustained ~ adjective ~ continuing for a long time
```

#### [Ukraine war briefing: Shoot down trespassing Russian jets if necessary – Czech president | Ukraine | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/21/ukraine-war-briefing-shoot-down-trespassing-russian-jets-if-necessary-czech-president)

The Czech president, Petr Pavel, has said Nato must respond **adequately** to Russian airspace violations, including potentially by shooting down Russian jets. Unfortunately, this is **teetering** on the edge of conflict, but giving in to evil is simply not an option.” 

British fighter jets have flown their first Nato air defence sortie over Poland as part of the Eastern **Sentry** mission following Russian drone incursions.

The general staff added that Ukrainian special forces struck a production and transit station in Samara for the export-grade **Urals** oil that **comprises** up to 50% of the total volume of Russian exports.

Trump has threatened sanctions but then **backtracked** to say he will do it only after all Nato countries agree to stop buying oil from Russia and put tariffs on China, another big importer of Russia’s oil. 

At least three people were killed when a missile carrying **cluster munitions** struck an apartment building in the city of Dnipro.

The special **rapporteur** on rights in Russia, Mariana Katzarova, denounces in her report “the continuing widespread and systematic recourse to torture and ill-treatment by Russian law enforcement officials, security forces, **penitentiary** officials and members of the armed forces”. The independent expert, who does not speak on behalf of the UN, said Russian authorities had “dismantled institutional independence, bringing the **judiciary**, legislature and law enforcement under direct political control.”

```
adequately ~ adverb ~ in a way that is enough or satisfactory for a particular purpose

teeter ~ verb ~ to appear to be about to fall while moving or standing

sentry ~ noun ~ a soldier who guards a place, usually by standing at its entrance

comprise ~ verb ~ to have things or people as parts or members; to consist of

backtrack ~ verb ~ to go back along a path that you have just followed

rapporteur ~ noun ~ someone chosen by an organization to prepare reports of meetings or to investigate and report on a problem

penitentiary ~ noun ~ a state or federal prison

judiciary ~ noun ~ the part of a country's government that is responsible for its legal system, including all the judges in the country's courts
```

#### [UK, Canada and Australia announce formal recognition of Palestine, with wave of Israel’s allies to follow | Palestinian territories | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/21/uk-canada-and-australia-announce-formal-recognition-of-palestine-with-wave-of-israel-allies-to-follow)

A wave of Israel’s allies are announcing their recognition of the state of Palestine, as part of a wider manoeuvre designed to **ostracise** Hamas and challenge attempts by the Israeli government to erase the chance of a Palestinian homeland.

The UK, Canada and Australia formally declared their recognition of Palestinian **statehood** on Sunday in separate but coordinated statements.

The delicate and partly symbolic move by as many 10 states, **pioneered** largely by the French government, has the potential to lead to a negative spiral of further confrontation.

The declarations with various conditions and **emphases** attached reflect the conflicting domestic pressures on governments as they face a backlash from Israel, and from hostage families that claim the move effectively rewards Hamas for its attack on Israel on 7 October 2023.

At the centre of the French plan, now fully endorsed by Arab states, is to make recognition part of a wider process, including a reformed, democratically elected Palestinian Authority that in the event of a ceasefire comes to **supersede** a disarmed and dismantled Hamas in Gaza.

Macron, identified by Israel as the **galvanising** force behind the surge in recognitions, went on Israel’s Channel 12 to warn “the approach of your government and some ministers especially is to destroy the possibility of a two-state solution.”

```
ostracise ~ verb ~ to avoid someone intentionally, or to prevent someone from taking part in the activities of a group

statehood ~ noun ~ the condition of being a country or a part of a large country that has its own government

pioneer ~ verb ~ a person who is one of the first people to do something

supersede ~ verb ~ to replace something, especially something older or more old-fashioned

galvanise ~ verb ~ to cause someone to suddenly take action, especially by shocking or exciting them in some way
```

He insisted recognition was not a reward for Hamas, since the terrorist group wanted an Islamic state and the destruction of Israel, something a two-state solution would **preclude**.

The US state department has tried to block Abbas from speaking from the **rostrum** at the UN in New York by denying US visas to the PA, a move that triggered a 145 to five vote at the UN general assembly to allow him to speak via a video link.

But the French argue the move has already brought concessions by Abbas on **deradicalisation**, and his **denunciation** of the 7 October attack as a terrorist act.

His proposals have been **roundly** rejected by Netanyahu.

The **quartet** are rallying countries around an emergency aid package to prevent the collapse of the PA.

```
preclude ~ verb ~ to prevent something or make it impossible, or prevent someone from doing something

rostrum ~ noun ~ a raised surface on which a person making a speech or a music conductor (= leader) stands

deradicalisation ~ noun ~ the process of making someone become less radical (= extreme) in their political or religious beliefs

denunciation ~ noun ~ public criticism of something or someone

roundly ~ adverb ~ severely

quartet ~ noun ~ a group of four people who play musical instruments or sing as a group
```

#### [What role has Britain played in the history of Israel and Palestine? | Palestinian territories | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/21/what-role-has-britain-played-in-the-history-of-israel-and-palestine)

In 1914 when the first world war began, the Ottoman empire threw in its **lot** with the **central powers** and Britain’s response was to declare Egypt a British protectorate. The following April, the members of the triple **entente** – France, Russia and Great Britain – started to secretly negotiate backroom plans for the Middle East on the assumption that the Ottoman empire would collapse.

Between 1915 and 1916, secret talks led to the Sykes-Picot agreement, a Franco-British deal fully disclosed only 20 years later, to **carve up** the Middle East.

At the same time, Arab leaders believed that in **correspondence** between Sharif Hussein, the **custodian** of the Islamic holy cities of Medina and Mecca, and Sir Harold McMahon, the high commissioner of Egypt, a clear commitment was given that Britain would support a **revolt** against the Ottomans and promote an independent Arab state covering the whole of Ottoman Asia.

In 1922, despite the promises of independence, Britain’s right to retain the mandate for Palestine was granted by the **League** of Nations and the Balfour declaration was included as part of that mandate.

In 1936 the Palestinians’ increasing frustration with the British led to open revolt, and then a brutal repression. The UK’s Peel commission decided **reluctantly** in 1937 that **partition** was the only answer, even though it would **entail** the mass displacement of Palestinians.

On the eve of the second world war in 1939, in an attempt to **mollify** both sides, a UK white paper said it favoured a Palestinian state within 10 years.

```
lot ~ noun ~ 

entente ~ noun ~ a friendly agreement or relationship between two countries

correspondence ~ noun ~ letters, especially official or business letters

custodian ~ noun ~ a person with responsibility for protecting or taking care of something or keeping something in good condition

revolt ~ noun ~ If a large number of people revolt, they refuse to be controlled or ruled, and take action against authority, often violent action.

league ~ noun ~ a group of people or countries who join together because they have the same interest

reluctantly ~ adverb ~ in a way that shows that you are not willing to do something and are therefore slow to do it

partition ~ noun ~ the dividing of a country into separate countries or areas of government

mollify ~ verb ~ to make someone less angry or upset
```

#### [UN and rights groups condemn reported jailing of Wuhan Covid citizen journalist | China | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/22/un-rights-groups-condemn-reported-jailing-wuhan-covid-citizen-journalist-zhang-zhan)

She was one of a number of independent journalists to be detained for broadcasting reports about the severe **lockdown** at **ground zero** of the pandemic.

Jeremy Laurence, a spokesperson for the UN human rights office, said reports of Zhang’s rearrest and sentencing were “deeply **disturbing**”.

He said: “This is the second time Zhang has been convicted and subjected to a **custodial** sentence for this offence.”

In August 2024, she was detained and later charged with “picking quarrels and provoking trouble”, with her **indictment** citing posts on social media that “seriously damaged the country’s image”

During Zhang’s first **spell** in prison she went on hunger strike and there were reports of her being force-fed.

```
lockdown ~ noun ~ an emergency situation in which people are not allowed to freely enter, leave, or move around in a building or area because of danger

ground zero ~ noun ~ the exact place where a nuclear bomb explodes

disturbing ~ adjective ~ making you feel worried or upset

custodial ~ adjective ~ relating to the legal right to care for someone or something, especially a child

indictment ~ noun ~ a formal statement of accusing someone of something

spell ~ noun ~ a period of time for which an activity or condition lasts continuously
```

#### [Kim Jong-un open to nuclear talks with US, saying he has ‘fond memories’ of previous Trump meeting | North Korea | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/22/kim-jong-un-nuclear-talks-fond-memories-donald-trump-meeting)

But there would be key **caveats**, Kim added, including Washington dropping “the absurd **obsession** with denuclearising us and accepts reality, and wants genuine peaceful coexistence”.

A freeze on North Korean nuclear weapons as “an **interim** emergency measure” would be “a **feasible**, realistic alternative” to complete denuclearisation, Lee, a liberal who favours engagement with his neighbour, told the BBC.

Instead, he has called for the resumption of inter-Korean dialogue and a more “realistic” **piecemeal** approach towards denuclearisation.

```
caveat ~ noun ~ a warning to consider something before taking any more action, or a statement that limits a more general statement

obsession ~ noun ~ something or someone that you think about all the time

interim ~ adjective ~ temporary and intended to be used or accepted until something permanent exists

feasible ~ adjective ~ able to be made, done, or achieved

piecemeal ~ noun ~ not done according to a plan but done at different times in different ways
```

#### [UK and Poland vow to confront Russian aircraft violating Nato airspace | Russia | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/22/uk-and-poland-vow-to-confront-russian-aircraft-violating-nato-airspace)

He added: “Russia’s neighbours, not **unreasonably**, fear they could be next.”

That is why we consider such words to be empty, unfounded and a continuation of a completely **reckless** pattern of escalating tensions and provoking a confrontational atmosphere.”

He added: “Either Moscow wants to escalate and pull more countries into this conflict with Ukraine, or it doesn’t have full control of those who operate its fighter planes and drones. Either scenario is very **disconcerting**.”

In Moscow, Vladimir Putin appeared to continue his recent **overtures** to Washington amid growing frustrations from Trump with the Russian president over **faltering** efforts to end the Ukraine war, as well as stalled talks between the US and Russia on other bilateral issues.

```
unreasonably ~ adverb ~ in a way that is not fair or acceptable

reckless ~ adjective ~ doing something dangerous and not worrying about the risks and the possible results

disconcerting ~ adjective ~ making someone feel uncertain and uncomfortable or worried

overture ~ noun ~ a communication made to someone in order to offer something

faltering ~ adjective ~ losing strength or purpose and stopping, or almost stopping
```

#### [Disruption across Italy as tens of thousands protest against Gaza war | Italy | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/22/disruption-across-italy-as-tens-of-thousands-protest-against-gaza-war)

The prime minister, Giorgia Meloni, has previously said it could be **counterproductive** to recognise the state of Palestine before it was established.

Grassroots unions across Italy called for a 24-hour general strike on Monday in solidarity with the people of Gaza, citing reasons that included the “**inertia** of the Italian and EU governments” to address the humanitarian crisis in the territory.

From Milan to Palermo, Italians poured on to the streets in at least 75 **municipalities** across the country.

Michelangelo, 17, told Agence France-Presse (AFP) he had turned up to support “a population that is being **exterminated**”.

Tensions escalated in Milan when dozens of protesters dressed in black and armed with batons tried to **smash** the main entrance of the city’s central train station.

More than 10 people were arrested in Milan and about 60 police officers suffered **bruising** or more serious injuries, according to Italy’s Ansa news agency.

Meloni has repeatedly voiced concerns about the Israeli offence but her far-right government – which has sought to **foster** close ties with Donald Trump’s administration in the US – has adopted a cautious stance on the war in Gaza.

The transport minister, Matteo Salvini, **downplayed** the impact of the protests on Monday, describing them as the “political mobilisation of far-left unionists” and praising those who had gone to work.

```
counterproductive ~ noun ~ having an effect that is opposite to the one intended or wanted

inertia ~ adjective ~ lack of activity or interest, or unwillingness to make an effort to do anything

municipality ~ noun ~ a city or town with its own local government, or the local government itself

exterminate ~ verb ~ to kill all the animals or people in a particular place or of a particular type

smash ~ verb ~ to cause something to break noisily into a lot of small pieces

bruise ~ verb ~ to develop a bruise or to cause someone or something to have a bruise

foster ~ verb ~ to encourage the development or growth of ideas or feelings

downplay ~ verb ~ to make something seem less important or less bad than it really is
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/24/super-typhoon-ragasa-update-path-hong-kong-taiwan-china

The outer **rim** of Super Typhoon Ragasa has been bearing down on Taiwan since Monday as its path moves down towards the southern Chinese coast.

The barrier lake, formed by landslides triggered by earlier heavy rain in Taiwan’s east, burst its banks mid-afternoon on Tuesday, unleashing a wall of water into the Guangfu **township**.

Ragasa had already toppled trees, torn the roofs off buildings and killed at least two people while **ripping** through the northern Philippines, where thousands sought shelter in schools and evacuation centres.

An AFP reporter saw waves nearly five metres high smash into the seaside **promenade** of Hong Kong’s Heng Fa Chuen residential district around nightfall.

Ragasa – named after the Filipino word for rapid motion – is expected to make **landfall** in the central and western coastal areas of Guangdong within 24 hours, the province’s emergency management bureau said on Tuesday morning.

```
rim ~ noun ~ the outer, often curved or circular, edge of something

township ~ noun ~ in the US and Canada, a unit of local government consisting of a town and the area surrounding it

rip ~ verb ~ to pull apart; to tear or be torn violently and quickly

promenade ~ noun ~ a path for walking on, especially one built next to the sea

landfall ~ noun ~ the first land that is reached or seen at the end of a journey across the sea or through the air, or the fact of arriving there
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/23/hungary-refuses-to-stop-buying-russian-oil-despite-trumps-nato-demand

Hungary will not **wean** itself off Russian energy supplies, the country’s foreign minister has told the Guardian, despite the White House’s demand for Nato allies to stop buying Russian oil.

Some allies questioned whether he is serious about wanting to increase pressure on Vladimir Putin or merely passing the **buck** to Europe.

Bloomberg reported that the EU is considering trade restrictions that could reduce or halt deliveries of oil through the pipeline, and that they could be introduced without unanimous consent, allowing other European countries to **outvote** Budapest and Bratislava.

“I hope and expect them to **step up to the plate** soon to help us end this bloodbath.”

Asked about European pressure on Monday, Szijjártó called western European officials “**fanatics**” and said it was “totally impossible to carry out a fact-based, rational dialogue based on common sense”.

But while relations with Brussels remain fraught, the relationship with the US has improved significantly, he added, saying that Hungary was the “only European government **crossing fingers** for Trump’s victory”.

```
wean ~ verb ~ to cause a baby or young animal to stop feeding on its mother's milk and to start eating other food, especially solid food, instead

buck ~ noun ~ used in some expressions to refer to the responsibility or blame for sth

outvote ~ verb ~ to defeat someone by winning a greater number of votes

fanatic ~ noun ~ a person who has very extreme beliefs that may lead them to behave in unreasonable or violent ways
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/23/british-officials-fear-donald-trump-could-recognise-israeli-west-bank-settlements

Trump made **passing** reference to Palestinian recognition during a **fiery** speech at the UN on Tuesday, saying: “This would be a reward for these horrible atrocities, including October 7.”

That move would **render** impossible a single Palestinian state covering the West Bank and Gaza.

Starmer spent much of his bilateral meeting with Trump last week explaining the reasons for recognising Palestine, and British officials were delighted when the US president appeared **sanguine** about the prospect in their joint press conference.

Under the Blair plan, which one British government source called “**the only game in town**”, Gaza would be governed by a UN-backed international transitional authority, without needing to expel Palestinians from the territory.

With Trump’s **blessing**, the UAE signed the accords in 2020 after Israel agreed to drop a proposal to annex parts of the West Bank.

```
passing ~ ajective ~ lasting only for a short time and not important or complete

fiery ~ adjective ~ showing very strong feeling

render ~ verb ~ to cause someone or something to be in a particular state

sanguine ~ adjective ~ (of someone or someone's character) positive and hoping for good things

bless ~ verb ~ agree
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/23/rodrigo-duterte-charged-crimes-against-humanity-icc-philippines-ntwnfb

The prosecutors accuse Duterte of designing and **disseminating** a policy to “**neutralise**” alleged criminals during his term as the mayor of Davao City, in the southern Philippines, and later during his term as president, alleging he **inducted** **hitmen** to a death squad and provided weapons, incentives and immunity for killings.

They allege: “The attack included thousands of killings, which were **perpetrated** consistently throughout the charged period.”

The third charge concerns 43 murders committed during “clearance” operations of lower-level alleged drug users or dealers, according to court documents, significant portions of which are **redacted**.

As the mayor, Duterte personally inducted hitmen into an infamous group known as the Davao death squad, and “**christened**” this group by **spraying** its members with a bottle of wine and distributing guns from a basket to each, it is alleged.

His lawyer, Nicholas Kaufman, has called for all legal proceedings to be **adjourned** indefinitely, saying Duterte is not fit to stand trial due to “cognitive **impairment** in multiple domains”.

```
disseminate ~ verb ~ to spread or give out something, especially news, information, ideas, etc., to a lot of people

neutralise ~ verb ~ to stop something or someone from having an effect

induct ~ verb ~ to introduce someone formally or with a special ceremony to an organization or group, or to beliefs or ideas

hitman ~ noun ~ a man who is paid to murder someone

perpetrate ~ verb ~ to commit a crime or a violent or harmful act

redact ~ verb ~ to remove words or information from a text before it is printed or made available to the public

christen ~ verb ~ to give a baby a name at a Christian ceremony and make him or her a member of the Christian Church

spray ~ verb ~ to spread liquid in small drops over an area

adjourn ~ verb ~ to have a pause or rest during a formal meeting or trial

impairment ~ noun ~ the act of spoiling something or making it weaker so that it is less effective
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/24/israeli-attempt-to-annex-west-bank-would-be-red-line-for-us-says-macron

On the other hand, if Netanyahu went ahead with annexation – with US endorsement or **quiescence** – the plan for a two-state solution in which a Palestinian state sits alongside Israel would be in serious **jeopardy**.

Macron said the fate of hostages and Gaza’s **civilian** population should not be “left in the hands of those for whom the release of hostages is not a priority”.

```
quiescence ~ noun ~ the state of being temporarily quiet and not active

jeopardy ~ noun ~ in danger of being damaged or destroyed

civilian ~ noun ~ a person who is not a member of the police or the armed forces
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/24/moscow-trump-change-in-tone-ukraine-war-paper-tiger

He warned that Vladimir Putin, **unchecked**, would use drones to expand his war throughout Europe.

No one could be **immune** to the spread of war, he said, adding: “We are living through the most destructive arms race in human history.”

Those that continued to fund the war **consigned** prisoners of war, abducted children and hostages to longer periods of captivity, he said.

Before Zelenskyy’s speech, Moscow had **brushed off** the shift in tone from Trump, including his claim Russia had been “fighting aimlessly for three and a half years”, a stark contrast to the red-carpet treatment he laid out for Putin at a summit in Alaska last month.

Peskov said the Russian army was making gains in Ukraine, **albeit** slowly.

Dmitry Medvedev, Russia’s former president now better known for his **outlandish** rhetoric, wrote on Telegram that Zelenskyy had lured Trump into an “**alternate reality**” where Ukraine could win the war.

“I have no doubt, he’ll be back. He always comes back …. Most likely he’ll soon tell Zelenskyy to sign an **act** of capitulation,” Medvedev wrote.

Also on Tuesday, Trump **berated** European countries for “embarrassing” purchases of Russian oil and gas, demanding they “immediately cease all energy purchases from Russia” or “otherwise we are all wasting a lot of time”.

In her account of the meeting, von der Leyen said: “By 2027, Europe will have turned the page on Russian fossil fuels **for good**.”

```
unchecked ~ adjective ~ If something harmful is unchecked, it is continuing or increasing without or despite any limits or attempts to prevent it.

immune ~ verb ~ not able to be punished or damaged by something

consign ~ verb ~ to send something to someone

albeit ~ conjunction ~ although

outlandish ~ adjective ~ strange and unusual and difficult to accept or like

berate ~ verb ~ to criticize or speak in an angry manner to someone
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/25/unite-to-end-wars-and-tackle-climate-crisis-australian-pm-tells-un-in-veiled-swipe-at-us-isolationism

“If we **resign** ourselves to the idea that war is inevitable, or **relegate** ourselves to the status of disinterested bystanders, then we risk being trusted with nothing,” Albanese told the **chamber**.

He credited US leadership with the creation of the international rules-based order, a system which he said had delivered **generational** economic transformation.

In a **rebuttal** of Trump, Albanese called climate change an existential threat for low-lying Pacific countries.

But dozens of Australian scientists, including some of the country’s top climate researchers, wrote to Albanese this week expressing **dismay** at the target and **imploring** the government “to go further”.

Albanese quoted the UN charter and said **succeeding generations** should be saved from the scourge** of war and be allowed to live with tolerance and peace.

```
resign ~ verb ~ In the game of chess, you resign when you cannot see any way to avoid being beaten.

relegate ~ verb ~ to put someone or something into a lower or less important rank or position

rebuttal ~ verb ~ a statement that says that something is not true

dismay ~ nooun ~ a feeling of unhappiness and disappointment

implore ~ verb ~ to ask someone to do or not do something in a very sincere, emotional, and determined way
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/24/trump-un-general-assembly-speech-analysis

Erdoğan insisted that Benjamin Netanyahu was completely out of control, and those that were silent in the face of his **barbarity** were complicit.

We are witnessing the **constellation** of an international order marked by repeated concessions to power play.

“All around the world, anti-democratic forces are trying to subjugate institutions and **suffocate** freedoms.” Lula said.

South Korea’s president, Lee Jae Myung, insisted that the climate crisis was far from being a **hoax**, and that it represents a threat to global humanity.

One response is the alliance of **autocrats** on display in Beijing at the beginning of the month led by Xi Jinping and Vladimir Putin.

In his speech, the UN secretary general, António Guterres, made a pitch for the UN’s continued **relevance**, but he acknowledged the **pillars** of peace and prosperity were **buckling**, and multilateralism was suffering.

```
barbarity ~ noun ~ behaviour that is very cruel, or a very cruel act

constellation ~ noun ~ any of the groups of stars in the sky that seem from earth to form a pattern and have been given names

suffocate ~ verb ~ o (cause someone to) die because of not having enough oxygen

hoax ~ noun ~ a plan to deceive someone, such as telling the police there is a bomb somewhere when there is not one, or a trick

autocrat ~ noun ~ a ruler with unlimited power, or someone who demands that people completely obey them

relevance ~ noun ~ the degree to which something is related or useful to what is happening or being talked about

pillar ~ noun ~ a strong column made of stone, metal, or wood that supports part of a building

buckle ~ verb ~ to bend something or become bent, often as a result of force, heat, or weakness
```

At Columbia, he drew applause defending the positive **virtues** of migration and said: “Open societies are the best **antidote** to **fanaticism**.”

He added: “When the voice of a society is silenced, it ends up dying. Open societies **thrive** on words.”

Sánchez is also one of the front-rank politicians trying to build alliances to stand up to Trump, convening on Wednesday with Lula and Chile’s Gabriel Boric an alliance entitled In Defence of Democracy focusing on issues such as reinforcing multilateralism, the rule of law, and cooperation against extremism and the algorithms that weaken social **cohesion**.

But these global alliances are still in their **infancy** and ill-coordinated.

In making that decision, each country will know the strength of Trump’s **shakedown** diplomacy.

```
virtue ~ noun ~ a good moral quality in a person, or the general quality of being morally good

antidote ~ noun ~ a chemical, especially a drug, that limits the effects of a poison

thrive ~ verb ~ to grow, develop, or be successful

cohesion ~ noun ~ the situation when the members of a group or society are united

infancy ~ noun ~ the time when someone is a baby or a very young child

shakedown ~ adjective ~ becoming organized after a period of change
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/25/taiwan-convicts-four-former-ruling-party-officials-of-spying-for-china

The four include a former aide to Taiwan’s president, Lai Ching-te, when he was vice-president and for a time during his current presidency, and a senior staffer to Joseph Wu, **then** foreign minister and now the national security chief.

Huang denied **wrongdoing** while Chiu pleaded guilty.

Lai says that such measures, which have been criticised for **muffling** free expression, are necessary to combat “grey zone” infiltrations of Taiwan’s military, government and society.

```
wrongdoing ~ noun ~ a bad or an illegal action

muffle ~ verb ~ to make a sound quieter and less clear
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/25/is-trump-right-that-russian-economy-is-on-brink-of-collapse

Russia’s economy is in deep **peril**, Donald Trump assured the world this week.

“For the first time since the invasion, the government is confronting a genuine **trade-off**.

“But a widening deficit, soaring defence **outlays** and shrinking revenues are making that choice harder,” Shagina added.

By every **metric**, the economy is under strain. The finance ministry projects GDP growth in 2024–25 at less than 1%, compared with earlier forecasts of 2.3–2.5%.

German Gref conceded earlier this month that Russia had slipped into “technical **stagnation**”.

To bolster state **coffers**, Moscow announced this week it would increase VAT from 20% to 22%, reversing one of Putin’s earlier promises. Russians will now finance the war more directly, with defence spending – **outstripping** the combined defence budgets of Europe – accounting for about 40% of the Kremlin’s total outlay this year.

```
peril ~ noun ~ great danger, or something that is very dangerous

outlay ~ noun ~ an amount of money spent for a particular purpose, especially as a first investment in something

metric ~ noun ~ using or relating to a system of measurement that uses metres, centimetres, litres, etc.

stagnation ~ noun ~ a situation in which something stays the same and does not grow and develop

coffer ~ noun ~ a large, strong box in which money or valuable objects are kept

outstrip ~ verb ~ to be or become greater in amount, degree, or success than something or someone
```

The government is expected to cut spending **across the board** – from corporations to infrastructure, healthcare and housing – to **plug** the gap.

After the west weaned itself off Russian oil and gas, Moscow redirected its energy exports to India, China and Turkey, relying on a **flotilla** of “shadow fleet” tankers that proved difficult to bring under sanctions.

The Kremlin has also softened the impact of restrictions on critical goods by **cultivating** a thriving trade in parallel imports, exploiting what critics have called a “sanctions hole”.

In Brussels, there is little appetite to **heed** Trump’s call for Ukraine’s European allies to slap 100% tariffs on India and China, the biggest buyers of Russian oil, to end their trade with Moscow.

More troubling for Moscow is that shortages are being reported in **diesel**, the fuel that underpins the Russian economy and its war machine.

“It will be truly crazy if, by the fourth year of the war, we still haven’t destroyed Ukraine’s energy sector, and they **end up** destroying ours,” one Russian pro-war blogger wrote this week.

```
plug ~ verb ~  to fill a hole with a piece of suitable material

flotilla ~ noun ~ a large group of boats or small ships

cultivate ~ verb ~ to try to develop and improve something

heed ~ verb ~ to pay attention to something, especially advice or a warning

diesel ~ noun ~ a type of heavy oil used as fuel
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/25/washington-backing-plan-for-tony-blair-to-head-transitional-gaza-authority

According to reports in Haaretz and the Times of Israel, the plan is **modelled** on the administrations that initially oversaw Timor-Leste and Kosovo’s transitions to statehood.

If approved, Blair would head a **secretariat** of up to 25 people and chair a seven-person **board** to oversee an executive body running the territory.

But Blair is bitterly **resented** by many Palestinians – who see him as having **impeded** their efforts to **attain** statehood – and more broadly across the region for his role in backing the 2003 US invasion of Iraq.

```
model ~ verb ~ to make a model of something

secretariat ~ verb ~ the office or people responsible for the management of an organization, especially an international or political one

board ~ noun ~ the group of people who are responsible for controlling and organizing a company or organization

resent ~ verb ~ to feel angry because you have been forced to accept someone or something that you do not like

impede ~ verb ~ to make it more difficult for something to happen or more difficult for someone to do something

attain ~ verb ~ to reach or succeed in getting something
```

Some western diplomats stressed it was **by no means** a **done** deal that Blair would run the interim Palestinian administration, and said it might be in place for only two years.

News of the plan emerged just days after the UN general assembly endorsed a different plan for a **technocratic** administration to take charge in Gaza.

The lack of a clear timeline for a transition to PA control under the White House plan is seen as a potential **roadblock** to its endorsement by Palestinians and Arab leaders. But that lack of **specificity**, and the presence of Blair, would be seen as a reassurance for the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu.

Arab states may argue that the Blair plan does not set out an **irreversible** course to statehood, but instead represents a different, more **benign** occupation than that provided by Israel.

```
technocratic ~ adjective ~ relating to or involving experts in science or technology who have a lot of power in government or business

roadblock ~ noun ~ a temporary structure put across a road to stop traffic

specificity ~ noun ~ the quality of being specific (= clear and exact)

irreversible ~ adjective ~ not possible to change; impossible to return to a previous condition

benign ~ adjective ~ pleasant and kind
```

The commissioner would also “track PA reform efforts in coordination with international **donors**, financial institutions and Arab partners engaged in Palestinian institutional development”.

The PEA would also receive reports from the Gaza municipalities, which would be responsible for delivering services at the local level; a judicial board chaired by an Arab **jurist** who will supervise Gaza’s courts and public prosecution office; and the **aforementioned** “Property Rights Preservation Unit”.

In an attempt to assuage fears that the plan will lead to tens of thousands of Palestinians being forced out of Gaza during the reconstruction, a “property rights preservation unit” would be established, aimed at ensuring that any **voluntary** departure of Palestinians from Gaza does not compromise their right to return to the territory or retain property ownership.

Abbas addressed the **gathering** by video **conference** after his visa was revoked by the US in the **run-up** to the 80th session of the UN general assembly.

```
donor ~ noun ~ a person who gives money or goods to an organization

jurist ~ noun ~ an expert in law, especially a judge

aforementioned ~ adjective ~ mentioned earlier

voluntary ~ noun ~ done, made, or given willingly, without being forced or paid to do it

conference ~ noun ~ an event, sometimes lasting a few days, at which there is a group of talks on a particular subject, or a meeting in which especially business matters are discussed formally
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/27/putin-preparing-to-attack-another-european-country-zelenskyy-says

Trump also said Russia’s economy was in big trouble and described its military as a “paper tiger”. Asked to explain this apparent warmer tone towards Ukraine, Zelenskyy said he had briefed Trump about the realities on the battlefield. He told him Russia’s advances were often **fleeting**: “It’s not success. It’s temporary presence.”

The US president now had greater “faith” in Ukraine and has discovered that Russia treated him and everyone else with “disrespect”, Zelenskyy said. He declined to comment on reports that he had asked the White House for US **Tomahawk** cruise missiles capable of striking Moscow, saying: “It’s a sensitive issue.”

```
fleet ~ adjective ~ able to run quickly

tomahawk ~ noun ~ a small fighting axe used by Native Americans
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/27/denmark-new-drone-sightings-biggest-military-base

Nato said it would “conduct even more enhanced **vigilance** with new multi-domain assets in the Baltic Sea region”, according to a statement emailed to Reuters, adding that the new assets included “intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance platforms and at least one air-defence **frigate**”.

At least two drones flew “for around an hour” in a restricted area close to Orland, the main base for Norway’s F-35 fighter jets and a key Nato base. “They were not **engaged** by us,” he said.

Moscow has denied breaching Nato’s airspace, calling the EU’s reaction a “**hysteria**” on Wednesday.

```
vigilance ~ noun ~ more careful attention, especially in order to notice possible danger

frigate ~ noun ~ a small, fast military ship

engage ~ verb ~ to attack or begin to fight someone

hysteria ~ noun ~ extreme fear, excitement, anger, etc. that cannot be controlled
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/26/argentina-drug-traffickers-livestream-killing-women

The murder of two young Argentinian women and a girl whose torture by suspected drug traffickers was livestreamed on a private Instagram group has sent shock waves through a country unused to such extreme levels of **narco** violence.

Investigators believe the drug traffickers planned the murders as punishment and revenge, after one of the victims stole a package of cocaine from one of the dealers, the alleged leader of a criminal group in a **marginalized** neighbourhood known as Villa 1-11-14.

They say these groups take advantage of rising poverty as well as cuts in public services under the far-right president, Javier Milei, to recruit young people who are struggling to **make ends meet**.

“We are seeing that large areas have been left at the mercy of small- and large-scale drug **mafias**, which infiltrated and ended up dominating the lives and **consciousness** of our people, especially children and young people, instilling a true culture of **delinquency** and criminality,” the Catholic diocese of San Justo, where the victims lived, said in a press release.

```
narco ~ noun ~ 

marginalize ~ verb ~ to treat someone or something as if they are not important

mafia ~ noun ~ a criminal organization that began in Sicily and is active in Italy and the US

consciousness ~ noun ~ the state of understanding and realizing something

delinquency ~ noun ~ behaviour, especially of a young person, that is illegal or not acceptable to most people
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/27/israeli-strikes-kill-people-gaza-city-attack

He added that 14 **premature** babies were treated in **incubators** in Helou hospital, though its head of **neonatal** intensive care, Dr. Nasser Bulbul, said the facility’s main gate had been closed because of drones flying over the building.

Dozens of delegates staged a **walkout** as he took to the **podium**, while protesters against Israel’s war gathered outside.

“We have been left with no choice but to stop our activities as our clinics are encircled by Israeli forces,” said Jacob Granger, the **charity**’s emergency coordinator in Gaza. “This is the last thing we wanted, as the needs in Gaza City are enormous, with the most at-risk people – **infants** in neonatal care, people with severe injuries and life-threatening illnesses – unable to move and in grave danger.”

```
premature ~ adjective ~ happening or done too soon, especially before the natural or suitable time

incubator ~ noun ~ a container that has controlled air and temperature conditions in which a weak or premature baby (= one which was born too early) can be kept alive

neonatal ~ adjective ~ of or for babies that were born recently

walkout ~ noun ~ the act of leaving an official meeting as a group in order to show disapproval, or of leaving a place of work to start a strike

podium ~ noun ~ a raised area on which a person stands to speak to a large number of people, to conduct music, or to receive a prize in a sports competition

charity ~ noun ~ help, especially in the form of money, given freely to people who are in need, for example because they are ill, poor, or have no home, and organizations that provide this help

infant ~ noun ~ a baby or a very young child
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/28/israel-presses-on-with-gaza-assault-as-trump-again-claims-ceasefire-is-close

Hundreds of thousands of Palestinians have complied with repeated orders to evacuate but many others have been unable to flee, often because they are ill, disabled, too **frail** or unable to afford expensive transport to safer areas.

Hamas’s armed **wing** urged the Israeli military to halt airstrikes temporarily and withdraw from part of Gaza City on Sunday to allow it to locate two Israeli hostages it said it had lost contact with there.

Trump said in a post on his Truth Social platform on Sunday: “We have a real chance for **GREATNESS** IN THE MIDDLE EAST, ALL ARE **ON BOARD** FOR SOMETHING SPECIAL, FIRST TIME EVER. WE WILL GET IT DONE!!!”

He promised at the start of his second term in office a quick end to the war but eight months later a resolution remains **elusive**.

The flotilla, which was struck in international waters off Crete on Wednesday by drones armed with **stun** grenades and **irritants**, rejected the suggestion.

In the occupied West Bank on Sunday, Israeli security forces shot dead an alleged attacker in a car-**ramming** incident in which an Israeli man was seriously injured at a **junction** near Nablus. Hamas praised the attack.

```
frail ~ adjective ~ weak or unhealthy, or easily damaged, broken, or harmed

wing ~ noun ~ a group within a political party or organization whose beliefs are in some way different from those of the main group

greatness ~ noun ~ importance and fame, power, or success

elusive ~ adjective ~ difficult to describe, find, achieve, or remember

stun ~ verb ~ to shock or surprise someone very much

irritant ~ noun ~ a substance that makes part of your body sore or painful

ram ~ verb ~ to hit or push something with force

junction ~ noun ~ a place where things, especially roads or railways, come together
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/sep/28/hundreds-of-russian-missiles-and-drones-hit-ukraine-as-poland-scrambles-jets

“This is **precisely** how Russia shows its true position.” he wrote on Telegram.

Residents scrambled to **take cover** amid air raid sirens. A missile wiped out most of a street in the Petropavlivska Borshchahivka district, **sheering** off roofs and blowing out windows.

A falling concrete **slab** crushed and killed a 12-year-old girl, Oleksandra. Classmates left flowers and toys outside her **gutted** house.

Mark Serhiyiv, a 35-year-old army **chaplain**, said it was the second time Moscow had destroyed his home.

On Sunday morning in Kyiv firefighters **doused** a burning car. Rescue workers and a digger **shovelled** up glass, **masonry** and twisted **rebar**.

```
precisely ~ adverb ~ used to emphasize what you are saying

sheer ~ verb ~ to change direction suddenly

slab ~ noun ~ a thick, flat piece of a solid substance, such as stone, wood, metal, food, etc., that is usually square or rectangular

gut ~ verb ~ to destroy the inside of a building completely, usually by fire

chaplain ~ noun ~ a Christian official who is responsible for the religious needs of an organization

douse ~ verb ~ to stop a fire or light from burning or shining, especially by putting water on it or by covering it with something

shovel ~ noun ~ a tool consisting of a wide, square metal or plastic blade, usually with slightly raised sides, attached to a handle, for moving loose material such as sand, coal, or snow

masonry ~ noun ~ the bricks and pieces of stone that are used to make a building

rebar ~ noun ~ steel in the form of bars or a mesh (= wires that cross over each other), put inside concrete to make it stronger
```
