---
layout: post
title:  "25年5月新闻摘选"
date:   2025-05-06 20:26:00 +0800
---

* 目录
{:toc #markdown-toc}

#### [2025-05-01 Snake on a train line: Japan’s busiest bullet train route brought to a halt](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/01/japan-snake-bullet-train)

Japan’s busiest bullet train line was brought to a halt on Wednesday after a metre-long snake wrapped itself around a power line, **shorting** the electricity supply and **stranding** hundreds of passengers.

**Shinkansen** trains running between Tokyo and **Osaka** were brought to a **standstill** by the snake, with news reports showing footage of people inside trains waiting for services to resume. Power did not appear to have been cut inside trains, with lights and air conditioning still functioning, according to passengers.

The **outage** happened at 5.25pm between Maibara and Gifu-Hashima stations, after the snake appeared to have climbed an electricity **pole**, meeting its **demise** as it attempted to **slither** along the overhead line. Power was not restored until after 7pm.

The Golden Week series of national holidays began on Wednesday, with millions on the move across Japan, returning to home towns and taking family vacations. In addition, the Osaka Expo 2025, which opened mid-April and runs until October, is attracting even more people than usual to the city.

“I use the shinkansen several times a month, but this is the first time I have experienced suspensions due to a power outage,” Satoshi Tagawa, 46, who was returning to Tokyo, told Kyodo News.

The line connects Tokyo, **Nagoya** and Osaka with more than 370 trains daily carrying an average of 430,000 passengers. Reaching speeds of up 285km per hour, it takes less than two and a half hours to Osaka from the Japanese capital.

More than 7 billion passengers have ridden the tokaido shinkansen since it opened as Japan’s first high-speed rail line just before the 1964 Tokyo Olympics. It has an **exemplary** safety record, with not a single injury or accident recorded, and trains running to within an average of 1.6 minutes of their scheduled times, according to operator Central Japan Railway Co. (JR Tokai).

However, it is not the first time reptiles have delayed shinkansen.

A 40cm snake inside a **carriage** on a Nagoya to Tokyo service in April last year caused **consternation** among passengers. Staff were unable to find the creature, and the carriage was replaced, resulting in a 17-minute delay.

In 2009, an electricity outage was also caused by a snake climbing on to power lines, stopping trains between Tokyo and **Fukushima**.

#### [2025-05-01 Japanese police arrest man after alleged car attack on schoolchildren, say reports](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/01/man-arrested-in-japan-after-allegedly-driving-a-car-into-schoolchildren-say-reports)

Police in the Japanese city of Osaka have arrested a man on suspicion of attempted murder after he drove his car into seven schoolchildren, according to local media.

The children were walking home from school when the suspect appeared to deliberately drive the car at them on a quiet residential street at about 1.30pm local time, the public broadcaster NHK reported.

A seven-year-old girl suffered a broken jaw and the other children – boys and girls aged seven and eight – are reported to have relatively light injuries. All appeared to be **conscious** as they were taken to hospital.

Police arrested Yuki Yazawa, 28, an unemployed man from Higashimurayama city in Tokyo, at the scene. It is not clear why he was in Osaka.

“I was just sick of everything so I decided to drive my car into the elementary school students to kill them,” Yazawa told police, according to NHK.

Teachers from the primary school are reported to have pulled the suspect out of the car, where he had remained after driving into the children.

A mother in her 20s who had come to pick up her son, and who saw the attack, told NHK: “The car was being driven **erratically**, and it seems that it continued to move forward even after it had hit the children.

“My son was very shocked and has been crying the whole time. He only just started elementary school last month, and then something like this happened. It’s scary. I saw the man who had been driving the car. He was very quiet and appeared to be in a **daze**.”

Another witness told NHK that the car reversed back into the children after crashing into them.

An elementary school pupil told another news outlet, MBS News, that the man in the car had been “driving unsteadily”.

“I was walking along the side of the road and the car and suddenly it almost drove into us. The second and third graders in front of me were injured and were bleeding from their heads after being trapped between the car and the wall,” the pupil said.

A white SUV that appeared to be the one used by the suspect was being examined by police.

#### [2025-05-02 ‘For a better life’: CIA releases videos to lure disgruntled CCP officials to spy on China](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/02/cia-china-videos-communist-party-spying-recruitment)

The CIA is on a **recruitment drive** for foreign spies. In their sights are Chinese officials and workers, who the US intelligence agency hopes to turn against Beijing via some newly released **glossy** videos.

The two videos touch on probable **anxieties** among some inside the Communist party machine – getting stuck in a lowly job assisting an increasingly wealthy corrupt official, or becoming victim to the endless purges that have targeted millions of party members at all levels since Xi Jinping came to power.

“As I rise within the party, I watch those above me being discarded like worn-out shoes, but now I realise that my fate was just as precarious as theirs,” a **narrator** says in one video, adding that he must protect his family whose fate is tied to his.

In another, the narrator declares: “Our leaders’ failure to fulfil repeated promises of prosperity has become a well-known secret … It’s time I start working towards my own dreams.”

The two Chinese-language videos released on Thursday come as trade hostilities between the two superpowers continue to spiral. Accessible on Youtube, they are titled in Chinese: “Why I contacted the CIA: to take control of my fate” and “Why I contacted the CIA: for a better life”.

“Do you have any information about economic, fiscal, or trade policies?” the CIA asks in the **caption**.

“Do you work in the defence industry? Do you work in national security, diplomacy, science, advanced technology, or deal with people who work in these fields? Please contact us. The information you can provide is important and we value your **insights** on these topics.”

The videos end with encrypted contact information for the agency.

The campaign follows earlier efforts which began in October, with instructions posted online for potential assets in China, Iran and North Korea to get in touch with the CIA. The agency has said it has had previous success **enlisting** Russians.

“If it weren’t working, we wouldn’t be making more videos,” a CIA official told Reuters, which said officials were confident the videos were getting past China’s strict internet controls.

In recent weeks Russian military recruitment videos have spread across Chinese social media, looking for mercenaries to fight in its war on Ukraine, but it’s not clear if Chinese authorities have allowed those videos to spread or simply been unable to stop them.

The CIA has a particular focus on rebuilding an espionage network inside China. A couple of years before Xi came to power in 2012, China’s ministry of state security reportedly dismantled a US spy ring, jailing and **executing** at least a dozen CIA **assets**.

In return, China has strengthened anti-espionage laws and encouraged citizens to carefully monitor and report the suspicious activities of those around them.

The US now considers China to be its most serious military and cyber threat.

“It is intent on dominating the world economically, militarily, and technologically,” CIA director John Ratcliffe said in a statement. “Our agency must continue responding to this threat with urgency, creativity, and **grit**, and these videos are just one of the ways we are doing this.”

#### [2025-05-06 Pakistan decries ‘act of war’ as it retaliates against India missile attack](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/06/pakistan-vows-to-retaliate-after-wave-of-indian-missiles-hit-country)

At least 26 people, including several children, have been killed and 46 injured after India launched attacks on what it claimed were nine sites of “terrorist infrastructure” inside Pakistan, in a sharp escalation of hostilities between the two nuclear-armed neighbours.

Pakistan declared the strikes to be an “**act of war**” and claimed it had shot down five Indian air force jets and a drone. “Pakistan gives a **befitting** reply to India,” said the Pakistan government in a statement.

India had accused Pakistan of involvement in an attack targeting Hindu tourists in Indian Kashmir last month that killed 26 people. “We are **living up to** the commitment that those responsible for this attack will be held accountable,” said the Indian defence ministry.

One Indian missile strike hit a **mosque** in the city of Bahawalpur in Punjab, Pakistan’s most populous province, killing 13 people, including two three-year-old girls. Other locations hit were near Muridke in Punjab and Kotli in Pakistan-controlled Kashmir, where a strike on a mosque killed several people, including a 16-year-old girl.

In a press conference held by the Indian army on Wednesday morning, it claimed the **overnight** strikes had targeted “terrorist training camps” and “terrorists likely to be sent across to India”, mostly associated with the Islamist militant groups Lashkar-e-Taib and Jaish-e-Mohammed.

Speaking at the press conference, Col Sudhir Chamoli **alleged** that Indian intelligence had uncovered evidence that “further attacks against India were **impending**” and said India needed to “both to deter and pre-empt”.

“These actions were measured, not escalatory, **proportionate** and responsible,” Chamoli said of the Indian strikes.

However, Pakistan denied that any of the sites hit by missiles had been associated with terrorist infrastructure, calling the allegations “unsubstantiated and unreasonable”, and said six civilian areas had been targeted.

Pakistan said the strikes had been carried out from the Indian side of the border. “At no time any of their aircraft were allowed to enter into Pakistan’s airspace and also at no time, none of Pakistan’s aircraft went into Indian airspace,” said Gen Ahmed Chaudhry, the director general of Pakistan’s **inter-services** public relations, the media wing of the military.

He said the Indian jets had been shot down by the Pakistan air force “when they attacked Pakistan, only after they released their weapons”.

Pakistan’s prime minister, Shehbaz Sharif, vowed to retaliate. “Pakistan has every right to respond forcefully to this act of war imposed by India, and a forceful response is being given,” he said. “The Pakistani nation and the Pakistan armed forces know very well how to deal with the enemy. We will never let the enemy succeed in its nefarious objectives.”

In a statement on Wednesday afternoon, after Sharif convened a meeting of the national security council, Pakistan emphasised its right to “**avenge** the loss of innocent Pakistani lives and **blatant** violation of its sovereignty” and said the military had been authorised to take action to do so.

The missile attacks were reported at about 1am local time. Pictures shared on social media showed the bloody body of a dead child and a seriously injured adult lying on **stretchers**. In a video shared widely on X, a huge blast can be seen lighting up the night sky as smoke billows into the air.

Residents in the Kupwara district of Indian-administered Kashmir reported heavy exchanges of fire between Indian and Pakistani troops on the line of control all through the night. The Indian army said that at least seven civilians had died and five had been injured in the cross-border shelling. On the Pakistan side, they said five civilians, including a five-year-old, had been killed.

According to reports, at least three Indian air force planes were brought down over Indian-administered Kashmir. In the village of Wuyan, Adnan Ahmad, 25, reported hearing a loud crash at about 1.40am.

“When I rushed to window I saw an aircraft in flames falling down,” he said. “There was another aircraft moving above the falling aircraft. The aircraft landed near a school building hitting trees. I rushed to the crash spot along with other neighbours. There were multiple explosions from the fallen wreckage for around an hour.”

There was no immediate comment from India on the reports of the downed military aircraft. Local people reported that pieces of the aircraft were **scattered** throughout the village and there was a strong smell of jet fuel.

On Wednesday morning, police and authorities blocked access to the main area of the crash as they cleared the wreckage. Sources said the pilot had **ejected** safely and was being treated at a nearby army hospital.

The strikes, carried out as part of “Operation Sindhoor”, were met with a **chorus** of approval across political lines in India. “The world must show zero tolerance for terrorism,” said India’s foreign minister, Subrahmanyam Jaishankar, while the defence minister, Rajnath Singh, wrote on X: “Victory to Mother India”. Mallikarjun Kharge, the president of the opposition Congress party, said India was “extremely proud of our Indian armed forces … We applaud their resolute **resolve** and courage”.

Several major airlines said they were suspending flights to Pakistan and over **swathes of** northern India until midday local time on Wednesday.

The escalation comes amid soaring tensions between the neighbours in the aftermath of the attack in the Baisaran Valley, a **picturesque** **meadow** in Pahalgam, a well-known tourist town in Kashmir.

India blamed Pakistan for the attack, accusations Pakistan rejected. The two sides have exchanged nightly gunfire since 24 April along the line of control.

Wednesday’s missile strikes are a dangerous **heightening** of tension between the south Asian neighbours, who have fought multiple wars since they were carved out of British colonial India in 1947.

For days, the international community has piled pressure on Pakistan and India to step back from the brink of war. A UN spokesperson said that António Guterres, the UN secretary general, was “very concerned” about the Indian strikes across the international border and the line of control.

“He calls for maximum military restraint from both countries. The world cannot afford a military confrontation between India and Pakistan,” the spokesperson said.

#### [2025-05-07 Xi Jinping to begin four-day Russia visit after Ukrainian drones attack Moscow](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/07/xi-jinping-begins-russia-visit-china-ukrainian-drones-moscow)

Xi Jinping is flying to Moscow for the start2 of a four-day visit during which he will attend Russia’s military **parade** **commemorating** the anniversary of the end of the second world war, known in Russia as Victory Day.

The Chinese leader’s trip has **coincided with** mass Ukrainian drone attacks on the Russian capital. Moscow’s mayor, Sergei Sobyanin, said Russia’s air defence units destroyed at least 19 Ukrainian drones overnight.

The attacks forced most of Moscow’s airports to close and Russia’s national carrier Aeroflot said it was reordering timetables to cope with the **disruption**.

The wave of drones launched by Kyiv to disrupt the Kremlin’s preparations for Victory Day forced at least one world leader to divert his flight to Moscow on Wednesday, with the Serbian president’s plane rerouted to Baku, Azerbaijan.

Aleksandar Vučić’s visit to Moscow, for which he has been heavily criticised by several major European capitals, had already faced complications after Latvia and Lithuania reportedly barred his plane from their airspace, forcing a significant **detour**.

Russia’s defence ministry said the Russian military had shot down more than 500 drones in the past 24 hours, while airport **closures** affected at least 60,000 passengers.

Xi’s visit, which comes as China is engaged in a trade war with the US and soon after Ukraine has accused China of directly aiding Russia’s invasion, underscores his close relationship with Vladimir Putin. It is Xi’s 11th visit to Russia – more than to any other country – since becoming president.

The Russian foreign ministry described the trip as “one of the **central** events in Russian-Chinese relations this year”. Xi is expected to sign numerous cooperation agreements, deepening the “no limits” relationship between China and Russia. There will also be discussion of the planned Power of Siberia 2 gas pipeline, which could carry 50bn cubic metres of gas a year from Russia to China.

Xi is expected to hold talks with Putin on Thursday and to attend the Victory Day parade on Friday. China’s People’s Liberation Army will send an **honour guard** to participate in the ceremony in Moscow for the first time since 2015, and for the first time ever will send an honour guard to join in parallel celebrations in Minsk, the capital of Belarus.

In an article published on Wednesday, Xi wrote: “China and Russia are both major countries with significant influence and are constructive forces in maintaining global strategic stability and improving global governance … Together we must **foil** all schemes to disrupt or undermine our **bonds** of **amity** and trust”.

Bilateral trade between China and Russia has reached record levels since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in 2022, providing Moscow with an economic lifeline at a time when western countries have imposed sanctions on it. Trade reached $245bn (£183bn) in 2024, 66% more than in 2021.

China maintains it is a neutral party in the war and that it supports a peaceful resolution to the conflict. But in recent months Kyiv has been increasingly **outspoken** about what it says is China’s direct aid for Moscow’s war efforts.

Two Chinese mercenaries, out of hundreds who have travelled to fight with the Russian army, were caught in the eastern Donetsk region last month. They did not have a direct link to the Chinese state but recruitment videos are easily found on China’s tightly controlled social media.

Volodymyr Zelenskyy has accused China of turning a blind eye to the participation of its nationals in the war.

Zelenskyy has criticised foreign leaders for travelling to Moscow, warning that Ukraine “cannot bear responsibility for what happens” to any heads of state attending the Victory Day parade.

Moscow has said that 29 world leaders are expected to attend the Victory Day commemorations, marking the largest foreign delegation at the Red Square parade since Putin launched his full-scale invasion more than three years ago.

#### [2025-05-08 Taiwan president says country faces similar threat to Europe before WW2](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/08/taiwan-president-europe-second-world-war)

Taiwan’s president, Lai Ching-te, has compared his nation to the European countries **heading for** conflict with Nazi Germany in the 1930s, in a **punchy** speech commemorating the end of the second world war in Europe.

“Eighty years after the end of the European war, the **message** of history is clear. Today, 80 years later, we **share** the same values ​​and face similar challenges as many of the democracies that participated in the European war,” Lai said to a group of foreign **dignitaries** gathered in Taipei.

Lai’s speech comes at a time when Taiwan is facing increasing military pressure from China. It is the first time Taiwan has officially commemorated the end of the second world war.

The conflict is a **thorny** topic in cross-strait relations. China at the time was ruled by the Kuomintang, or the nationalists, under the **banner** of the Republic of China. During the war, the Kuomintang fought alongside the Chinese Communist party (CCP) against the Japanese, before resuming their own civil conflict, which led to the Kuomintang fleeing to Taiwan in 1949 and establishing the Republic of China there. This remains the island’s official name. The CCP established the People’s Republic of China in Beijing.

In a **veiled reference** to China, Lai called on “freedom-loving people and countries” to work together to counter authoritarian regimes.

“Taiwan and Europe are jointly facing the threat of a new **totalitarian** group,” Lai said. “The bitter experience of world war two tells us that **appeasement** will only make the invaders more greedy and expand their ambitions.”

Thursday’s event opened with a short video **featuring** clips of the D-day landings in Normandy and audio recordings of Winston Churchill’s famous “We shall fight on the beaches” speech. The top British representative in Taiwan, Ruth Bradley-Jones, spoke at the event, as did Lutz Güllner, the head of the European Economic and Trade Office in Taiwan

Marcin Jerzewski, the head of the Taiwan office of the European Values Center for Security Policy, said Lai was “trying to send the message that security and prosperity of Taiwan and Europe are still **interconnected**, so that European partners fearing possible withdrawal of American security guarantees from Europe don’t turn away from their engagements with the Indo-Pacific and security in the Taiwan Strait.”

Lai is **steering** Taiwan through a fraught geopolitical moment. The self-governing island is claimed by China, which has vowed to annex it with the use of force if necessary. Since Donald Trump took office as US president in January, the commitment of the US, Taiwan’s main security backer, to helping Taiwan defend itself has been unclear.

China frequently **rehearses** blockades of Taiwan. So-called “greyzone” tactics such as disinformation campaigns have been increasing.

Wen-Ti Sung, a non-resident fellow at the Atlantic Council’s Global China Hub, said Lai also wanted to show that “Taiwan wants to be a partner, not just a recipient, of western **largesse**”.

Lai’s speech came the day after China’s president, Xi Jinping, arrived in Moscow for Russia’s commemoration of the end of the second world war, which will be marked with a military parade featuring Chinese troops on Friday.

China’s ongoing support for Russia’s war in Ukraine has alarmed western leaders and raised concerns that China could be learning lessons for an invasion of Taiwan.

In an article published in Russian media on Wednesday about Chinese and Soviet cooperation during the second world war, Xi **devoted** a **lengthy** section to the war’s **implications** for China’s claims on Taiwan.

Xi described this week’s commemorations as “the 80th anniversary of Taiwan’s recovery” to China. “No matter how the situation on the island of Taiwan changes, no matter how external forces disrupt it, the historical trend that China will eventually reunify and will definitely reunify is unstoppable,” Xi wrote.

Xi expressed China’s appreciation for Russia’s support for “all measures taken by the Chinese government and people to achieve national reunification”.

#### [2025-05-08 Xi hails ‘confident’ China-Russia ties as Putin welcomes ‘dear friend’ to Kremlin](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/08/xi-jinping-vladimir-putin-china-russia-kremlin)

Xi Jinping and Vladimir Putin exchanged warm words in the Kremlin on Thursday during a **grand** ceremony welcoming the Chinese leader for his 11th visit to Russia.

Xi said the Sino-Russian relationship was “confident, stable and **resilient**” in the new era and that China was willing to work with Russia to promote a multipolar world.

Putin described his Chinese counterpart as a “dear friend”, while Xi described Putin as his “old friend”.

Xi said: “History and reality have fully proven that the continued development and deepening of China-Russia relations is a natural **continuation** of the longstanding friendship between our peoples.”

Xi is in Moscow for the 80th anniversary celebrations of the end of the second world war, which is commemorated in Russia as Victory Day on 9 May.

World leaders flying into Moscow for the event faced the threat of disruption from Ukrainian drone attacks, which forced most of the Russian capital’s airports to close on Wednesday. The flight of the Serbian president, Aleksandar Vučić, was rerouted.

Xi, whose plane was escorted by Russian fighter jets, was greeted on Wednesday by a military band playing the national **anthems** of Russia and China.

A three-day ceasefire declared by Russia to coincide with the celebrations appears to have held, with the Ukrainian air force saying no Russian missiles or drones had been detected in Ukrainian airspace as of 8am local time on Thursday.

Xi is expected to sign several cooperation agreements with Putin during his four-day visit, deepening China and Russia’s already “no limits” friendship.

In an article published in Russian media on Wednesday, Xi said China and Russia had fought side by side in the second world war. “Today, 80 years later, **unilateralism**, hegemony and bullying are extremely harmful,” Xi wrote. “We must learn from history … [and] **resolutely** oppose all forms of hegemony and power politics, and jointly create a better future for mankind.”

On Thursday he said the world was facing “unilateralism and acts of **hegemonic** bullying in the international **arena**”, a veiled reference to the US-China trade war, in which China has accused the US of coercive behaviour.

Hopes in some Washington **circles** that the Trump administration might have been able to perform a “reverse Nixon” and persuade Russia to decouple with China by **bolstering** the US-Russia relationship appear to have failed with Xi and Putin’s declaration that their countries are closer than ever before.

China has been an economic lifeline to Russia during the war in Ukraine, and in recent weeks Kyiv has been increasingly outspoken about what it says is China’s direct aiding of Moscow’s war effort.

The comments from Xi and Putin came a few hours after Lai Ching-te, the president of Taiwan, gave a punchy speech in Taipei calling on European leaders to stand with Taiwan in the face of “a new totalitarian group”, a veiled reference to China and its allies. Lai compared Taiwan’s current **predicament** to that of European countries before the start of the second world war.

Xi has used this visit to underscore Russia’s support for China’s claims on Taiwan. “Russia has repeatedly reiterated that it adheres to the one-China principle, that Taiwan is an **inalienable** part of China’s territory, opposes any form of ‘Taiwan independence’, and firmly supports all measures taken by the Chinese government and people to achieve national reunification,” Xi wrote on Wednesday.

Western leaders are increasingly worried that China could launch some form of assault on Taiwan in the next few years, with the war in Ukraine providing a blueprint for how such an attack might **play out** on the world stage.

#### [2025-05-09 China and Russia pledge to deepen ties as they criticise US on Victory Day](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/09/china-russia-ties-criticise-us-victory-day)

China and Russia pledged to further deepen their already “no limits” partnership in a joint statement published ahead of Russia’s military parade on Friday, as the two sides stressed the importance of maintaining the “correct view” of second world war history.

In a lengthy statement published during Xi Jinping’s visit to Moscow for the commemoration of the 80th anniversary of the end of the second world war, which Russia celebrates on 9 May as Victory Day, Xi and his Russian counterpart Vladimir Putin said “certain countries … are attempting to **tamper** with the results of the victory of the second world war”.

Xi is on his 11th visit to Russia since becoming president in 2013. On Thursday Xi and Putin held nearly four hours of talks in which both leaders described the other as a close friend. Putin announced plans to visit China in the autumn for the commemoration of Japan’s defeat in the second world war.

The Xi-Putin statement went further than previous ones in directly condemning the United States.

“The United States and its allies are trying to promote **Nato’s eastward expansion** into the Asia-Pacific region, build ‘small circles’ in the Asia-Pacific region, and **win over** countries in the region to promote their ‘Indo-Pacific strategy’, undermining regional peace, stability and prosperity,” the statement read.

China has long **sympathised** with Russia’s argument that Nato expansion in Europe was a threat to its security.

The statement also said that “unilateral coercive measures, including economic sanctions, that **bypass** the UN security council violate the UN Charter and other international laws and undermine international security interests”.

China is fighting an escalating trade war with the US that has rocked global markets since US president Donald Trump took office in January. China and the US are due to hold preliminary talks on de-escalating the tariffs this weekend. Meanwhile, Russia is under pressure from the US to pursue peace talks in Ukraine. This week’s meeting of the Chinese and Russian leaders underscores the close relationship between the two men who see themselves as a **bulwark** against US hegemony.

Earlier this week Xi claimed that the second world war also represented the “liberation” of Taiwan and marked “Taiwan’s return to China”. The Chinese Communist party claims Taiwan as part of its territory but it has never ruled over the island. The Republic of China fled there in 1949 after being defeated by the communists in the Chinese civil war. China has vowed to annex the island, by force if necessary, and Xi has made it clear that he sees resolving the “Taiwan problem” as an important part of his legacy.

The joint Xi-Putin statement stated that Russia “firmly supports the measures taken by the Chinese government to safeguard national sovereignty and territorial integrity and achieve national reunification”.

Although China and Russia do not have a normal military alliance, there are growing concerns in the west about the close security cooperation between the two countries. China and Russia conducted 14 joint military exercises in 2024, according to data **compiled** by the ChinaPower project, which tracks military and economic developments.

A Chinese honour guard will participate in Friday’s military parade in Moscow for the first time since 2015.

#### [2025-05-09 Chinese troops march with Russian forces as Xi joins Putin for Victory Day parade](https://www.theguardian.com/weather/2025/may/09/chinese-troops-march-with-russian-forces-as-xi-joins-putin-for-victory-day-parade)

Russian troops fighting in Ukraine have marched with Chinese forces on Moscow’s Red Square to mark the 80th anniversary of Nazi Germany’s defeat in a Victory Day celebration marked by greater **spectacle** than in recent years.

After several **scaled-back** Victory Days – with reduced military displays and few foreign guests – Vladimir Putin on Friday addressed the largest parade since his 2022 full-scale invasion of Ukraine.

“The Soviet Union **took upon** itself the most **ferocious**, **merciless** **blows** of the enemy,” the Russian president said of the victory over Nazi Germany, before turning to his invasion of Ukraine. “Truth and justice are on our side. The entire country, society and people support the participants of the special military operation,” Putin said, using the Kremlin’s preferred term to describe the war.

While Putin was **presiding** over the parade, EU foreign ministers and Britain’s David Lammy travelled to Lviv in Ukraine where they announced the establishment of a **tribunal** for Russian war crimes. “Russia’s aggression cannot go unpunished and therefore establishing this tribunal is extremely important,” the EU’s top diplomat, Kaja Kallas, said during the visit.

Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, said he expected European leaders to visit Kyiv on Saturday, while European allies said at a meeting in Oslo that they supported an unconditional 30-day ceasefire in the war in Ukraine, something Moscow has been reluctant to agree to.

Moscow welcomed at least 27 foreign heads to the annual military parade, the highest number since 2015, including the leaders of Brazil, Slovakia and Serbia. The Kremlin presented the **turnout** as proof that it is not isolated, even four years into its war in Ukraine.

Other guests included leaders from fellow **autocracies** and pariah regimes, such as the military **juntas** from Myanmar and Burkina Faso.

Putin also thanked a visiting North Korean military delegation – a sign of deepening ties and new geopolitical realities after recent admissions from both sides that North Korean troops have been fighting alongside Russian forces in Ukraine.

Presiding over the parade, Putin sat beside the Chinese leader, Xi Jinping, and was seen in frequent conversation with his most powerful ally. The two men held extensive talks before the parade, and their joint statement went further than previous statements in directly condemning the US.

The Brazilian president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, was also in Moscow for the parade, and later on Friday met Putin. He criticised Donald Trump’s tariffs and pitched an expanded partnership with Moscow. “We have the chance at this historic moment to make our commercial relationship grow a lot,” he said.

This year’s parade featured an expanded military presence, with a fleet of tanks rolling across Red Square alongside rocket launchers, TOS-2 Tosochka heavy **flamethrower** systems and Iskander ballistic missiles – all weapons used in the war in Ukraine. For the first time, several types of modern Russian-made drones were also on display, underscoring their role as a **defining** feature of the conflict.

The **showcase** of weaponry marked a **stark** contrast to 2024’s **toned-down** parade, when a single Soviet-era tank rolled through Red Square. The shift is likely to **resonate** in European capitals, where officials have grown increasingly concerned about Moscow’s ability to **replenish** its military stockpiles and increase weapons production.

Over his two-and-a-half decades in power, Victory Day has emerged as the **centrepiece** of Putin’s vision of Russian identity. But since the start of Russia’s full-scale invasion, the Kremlin’s **mass** propaganda machine has given it new meaning, with Putin using the celebrations to justify the current war.

Seated not far from Putin were several high-profile veterans of the war in Ukraine, while Russian media reported that more than 1,500 troops who took part in the invasion participated in the march.

Putin has weaponised the legacy of the second world war to **mobilise** support for his invasion, falsely portraying Zelenskyy, who is Jewish, as a leader **resurrecting** nazism in Ukraine.

Andrei Kolesnikov, a Moscow-based political analyst, said: “Victory Day is by far the most important celebration for Putin – it’s an **ideological** event designed to rally the nation around him. The central message to the public is that the current ‘special military operation’ is a logical continuation of the Great Patriotic War.”

In a speech a day earlier, Zelenskyy condemned what he called Russia’s attempt to “**appropriate** Ukraine and distort history”, accusing the Kremlin of twisting the legacy of the second world war for propaganda purposes.

“Tomorrow, the organiser of the **mass graves** in Bucha will speak of Nazi atrocities. The architects of the Mariupol siege will invoke the siege of **Leningrad**. It will be a parade of **cynicism**, **bile**, and lies,” Zelenskyy said.

Despite the show of might on Red Square on Friday, there was widespread nervousness among Moscow’s political elite before the celebrations.

At the end of April, Putin announced a three-day unilateral ceasefire in Ukraine, starting on 8 May to coincide with the commemorations. Zelenskyy dismissed the offer as **self-serving** and meaningless unless it was extended to 30 days, in line with a US-backed proposal that Putin has so far rejected.

In the **lead-up to** Victory Day, Ukraine significantly increased its drone attacks on Moscow and surrounding regions, causing airport closures and logistical chaos.

Zelenskyy also warned that Ukraine would provide no security guarantees to foreign guests attending the parade in Moscow. As many observers had predicted, Kyiv appeared to refrain from targeting Moscow on the day of the parade, probably owing to the presence of high-profile international dignitaries.

Still, fighting continued near the frontlines, with Moscow accusing Ukrainian forces of attempting to breach the border in Russia’s Kursk and Belgorod regions.

This year’s parade comes at what many see as a crossroads moment for Moscow, as the Trump administration steps up its efforts to persuade Putin to end the war. There appears to be a growing recognition in the White House that the Kremlin is not ready to back down from its maximalist demands, including territorial claims over parts of Ukraine it does not control.

The US vice-president, JD Vance, echoed that frustration earlier this week, saying Russia was asking for “too much” in the talks, in the latest sign of Washington’s impatience with the negotiations.

Britain, France and a group of north European nations met in Oslo to discuss a route to a lasting peace in Ukraine. The Norwegian prime minister, Jonas Gahr Støre, said that during a dinner on Thursday the leaders had phone contact with Trump and Zelenskyy, and were pushing for a full ceasefire. “That needs to be monitored and respected before you can move into the negotiations on the big issues to reach a lasting peace,” he said.

Kolesnikov said Putin appeared undecided about whether to enter into serious negotiations or continue the war in Ukraine, where Russian forces are making slow, grinding progress at a high human cost. “For now, he is stalling for time,” he said.

#### [2025-05-10 India and Pakistan agree Kashmir ceasefire but accuse each other of breaches](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/10/india-pakistan-immediate-us-mediated-ceasefire)

India and Pakistan have agreed to a US-mediated ceasefire with immediate effect, though its **longevity** was thrown into question after reports of cross-border shelling and explosions in Indian-administered Kashmir just hours after it was announced.

The ceasefire – which was hoped to end days of escalating clashes between the two nuclear-armed countries – was first declared by the US president, Donald Trump, on Saturday afternoon, after 48 hours of diplomacy between India and Pakistan, apparently brokered by the US secretary of state, Marco Rubio, and vice-president, JD Vance.

Trump, in a post on his Truth Social platform, said: “After a long night of talks mediated by the United States, I am pleased to announce that India and Pakistan have agreed to a FULL AND IMMEDIATE CEASEFIRE. Congratulations to both Countries on using Common Sense and Great Intelligence. Thank you for your attention to this matter!”

The ceasefire was later confirmed in a post on X by the Pakistani deputy prime minister and foreign minister, Ishaq Dar, who said the ceasefire would come in “with immediate effect”.

The Indian foreign secretary, Vikram Misri, said the heads of military operations from both countries had spoken on Saturday afternoon.

“It was agreed between them that both sides would stop all firing and military action on land, and in the air and sea. Instructions have been given on both sides to **give effect** to this **understanding**.” The top military officials would speak again on 12 May, Misri added.

However, the agreement was thrown into question after cross-border shelling restarted between the Indian and Pakistan armies on Saturday night. Srinagar, the main city in Indian-administered Kashmir, was also rocked by heavy explosions from projectiles that soared across the border.

On Saturday night, Misri said India’s armed forces had been given instructions to “deal strongly” with the violations.

An Indian government source told AFP that Pakistan had violated the ceasefire. A senior Pakistani security source said it was India that had started the ceasefire violations.

The Pakistani foreign ministry said in the early hours of Sunday that it “remains **committed to** **faithful** implementation” of the ceasefire it has agreed to with India.

Accusing India of committing its own violations, the Pakistani foreign ministry said its forces were “handling the situation with responsibility and restraint”. It continued: “We believe that any issues in smooth implementation of the ceasefire should be addressed through communication at appropriate levels. The troops on ground should also exercise restraint.”

Rubio said the ceasefire agreement had come after extensive negotiations by him and Vance with the Indian and Pakistani prime ministers, Narendra Modi and Shehbaz Sharif, and other top officials.

“I am pleased to announce the governments of India and Pakistan have agreed to an immediate ceasefire and to start talks on a broad set of issues at a neutral site,” Rubio said on X.

“We commend prime ministers Modi and Sharif on their wisdom, **prudence**, and **statesmanship** in choosing the path of peace,” he added.

News of the ceasefire was greeted with celebrations across India and Pakistan, particularly in Kashmir, the disputed region divided between the two countries that had been at the forefront of hostilities, with dozens killed in shelling over the border – known as the Line of Control (LoC) – in the past week.

In Uri, near the border in Indian-administered Kashmir, one of the worst-hit towns in the recent cross-border violence, Tanveer Chalko, 30, described scenes of **jubilation**.

“When news of the ceasefire broke, displaced families in camps began dancing with joy,” he said. “This is a great step towards peace and the welfare of the people. As a resident of a frontier area, I cannot put into words what this announcement means for us. Now everyone is preparing to return home.”

But Lal Din, 55, a resident of Poonch, a border town in Indian-administered Kashmir where many were killed and injured in this week’s violence along the LoC, said the news of the ceasefire was **bittersweet**. His home was destroyed in cross-border shelling and two of his relatives were killed.

“We’ve been here before – temporary ceasefires brokered by global powers. But until India and Pakistan seriously settle their disputes, we must brace for even greater conflicts,” he said.

However, those who gathered in the streets to celebrate were then driven indoors as explosions began to boom out over parts of Indian-Kashmir on Saturday night.

Historically, the US has played an important role as a mediator between India and Pakistan when hostilities have **flared** up. The Trump administration’s **proactive** role in brokering peace was, however, a notable reversal of Vance’s position 48 hours earlier, when he said the US would not intervene in the India-Pakistan conflict as it was “none of our business”.

The ceasefire appeared to give both sides the opportunity to walk away claiming victory. “India has consistently maintained a firm and uncompromising stance against terrorism in all its forms and **manifestations**,” said India’s foreign minister, Subrahmanyam Jaishankar.

In Pakistan it was met with **a chorus of approval**. “Congratulations to the civil and military leadership for emerging out of the war with dignity, **professionalism** and national resolve **unequivocally** **intact**,” said the Pakistani senator Sherry Rehman.

The ceasefire came after India and Pakistan accused each other of cross-border missile strikes against significant military targets on Saturday, with many fearful it would escalate into **all-out** war. India and Pakistan have fought four wars, most recently in 1999.

The fighting this week was first **inflamed** on Wednesday after Indian missiles struck nine sites in Pakistan, killing 31 people. India has said those strikes were in response to an attack in Indian-administered Kashmir late last month, in which militants killed 25 Hindu tourists and a guide, which it blamed on Pakistani-backed extremists.

The situation escalated further after India accused Pakistan of two **consecutive** nights of drone attacks. India claimed to have intercepted more than 400 drones targeting cities, military bases and places of worship across the north of the country on Thursday. In retaliation, India said it had launched four drone strikes on Pakistan, directly targeting military defence infrastructure.

By Saturday morning, India had accused Pakistan of launching strikes on dozens of airbases and military headquarters across north India, using long-range weapons, drones and fighter aircraft. The accusations came a few hours after Pakistan said India had fired six surface-to-air missiles targeting three of Pakistan’s most important military bases early on Saturday morning. Both accused the other of firing cross-border missiles first.

#### [2025-05-12 Taiwan ex-president Tsai Ing-wen to visit UK as China ratchets up threats against Taipei](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/12/tsai-ing-wen-uk-visit-former-taiwan-president)

Former Taiwan President Tsai Ing-wen will visit Britain this week at the invitation of British politicians, a trip that comes as London is trying to improve ties with Beijing and China ramps up efforts to diplomatically isolate the island.

Britain, like most countries, has no official diplomatic ties with Taiwan, but the economic and political exchanges between the two sides have increased as Beijing ratchets up military threats to force Taipei to accept its sovereignty claim over the democratic island.

Tsai, who stepped down in May last year, has become a symbol of Taiwan’s defiance against China’s military threats. She is now in Lithuania and will travel to Denmark and then Britain later this week, her office said.

Tsai was invited by “friends in Britain’s parliament” in a trip that is designed to deepen friendship between Taiwan and Britain, the office said in a statement, adding Tsai, who has a **doctorate** from the London School of Economics, will meet unspecified British politicians.

Britain’s Foreign Office did not immediately respond to a request for comment sent outside office hours in London.

China’s foreign ministry also did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Tsai had been due to visit London in October last year, but that coincided with a trip to Beijing by British foreign secretary David Lammy at a time when London was trying to reset **strained** ties with China. Tsai did not **end up going**.

Tsai last year visited the **Czech** Republic, France, **Belgium** and Canada, drawing condemnation from Beijing which has repeatedly **denounced** Tsai as a “separatist”.

Despite a lack of formal ties, Taiwan sees Britain as an important democratic partner.

In 2023, Taiwan and Britain signed an Enhanced Trade Partnership Arrangement and Britain is also one of the countries that has helped Taiwan with its **indigenous** submarine programme, a vital part of Tsai’s push to boost Taiwan’s defence against China’s threat.

China says Taiwan is one of its provinces with no right to the **trappings** of a state, a position Taipei’s government strongly rejects.

#### [2025-05-12 Brazil’s president seeks ‘indestructible’ links with China amid Trump trade war](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/12/brazil-china-trade-lula-da-silva-trump)

The Brazilian president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, has **heralded** his desire to build “**indestructible**” relations with China, as the leaders of three of Latin America’s biggest economies flew to Beijing against the backdrop of Donald Trump’s trade war and the **profound** international uncertainty his presidency has generated.

Lula touched down in China’s capital on Sunday for a four-day state visit, accompanied by 11 ministers, top politicians and a delegation of more than 150 business leaders.

Hours later Colombia’s president, Gustavo Petro, arrived, making a **beeline** for the Great Wall of China and declaring his desire for the South American country to not “only look one way” towards the US. “We have decided to take a profound step forward between China and Latin America,” Petro said.

Chile’s Gabriel Boric has also travelled to Beijing to attend Tuesday’s meeting between members of the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (Celac) and Chinese representatives.

Addressing hundreds of Chinese and Brazilian business chiefs in the Chinese capital on Monday, Lula **hit out** at Trump’s tariffs, saying he could not accept the measures “that the president of the US tried to impose on planet Earth, **from one day to the next**”.

The Brazilian leftist said he hoped to build an “indispensable” relationship with China – already Brazil’s top trading partner – and **heaped** praise on his Communist party hosts as his officials announced $4.6bn (£3.5bn) of Chinese investment in their country. On Tuesday, Lula is scheduled to meet China’s leader, Xi Jinping, who is expected to return the visit in July, when Xi travels to the Brics summit in Rio.

“China has often been treated as though it were an enemy of global trade when actually China is behaving like an example of a country that is trying to do business with countries which, over the past 30 years, were forgotten by many other countries,” said Lula, who is expected to seek major Chinese investments in Brazilian infrastructure projects.

The visit of the three South American leaders to China underlines the east Asian country’s rapidly growing **footprint** in a region where, over the past 25 years, it has become a **voracious** consumer of commodities such as **soybeans**, **iron ore** and copper. Chinese companies have also **poured into** the region. Electric cars made by the Chinese manufacturer BYD can be seen **cruising** the streets of Brazilian cities, from Brasília to Boa Vista, deep in the Amazon.

The visits also come amid global **jitters** over Trump’s volatile presidency and Latin American anxiety and suspicion over the US president’s plans for a region where he has threatened to “take back” the Panama **canal** – by force if necessary.

Matias Spektor, an international relations professor at the Getúlio Vargas Foundation, a Brazilian thinktank and university, said the presence of the three South American presidents in Beijing underscored how, in the Trump era, with the US in retreat, such leaders were increasingly reaching out to other parts of the world.

“It tells us that countries around the world are willing to go out … to exploit all the opportunities that are there in the international system – and there are many. Because, as America turns away from free trade and as America **adopts** a policy that is … instead of **transactional**, **predatory** – countries have an incentive to engage with those who are transactional,” Spektor said, pointing to recent trips Lula made to Japan and Vietnam.

“Lula is very proactively trying to open trade for Brazil at a time when America is **undoing** the previous rules of the game, and the new rules of the game are not yet born … These Latin American countries want to shape the norms that are likely to emerge now. And those rules are not going to emerge in Washington DC. They are going to be made globally,” Spektor added.

Spektor said Latin American leaders such as Lula had long considered the world a multipolar place. “What happened on 20 January with Trump’s return to power is that the **barrage** of policy change coming from Washington DC has accelerated the belief that was already in place that the axis of global power has for a while been moving towards the east, and somewhat towards the south.”

#### [2025-05-13 China cautiously welcomes pause in US tariff war](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/13/china-cautiously-welcomes-pause-in-us-tariff-war)

A 90-day pause in the US-China tariff war has been cautiously welcomed in China but tensions remain high, with Xi Jinping again accusing the US of “bullying”.

After two days of talks between officials in Geneva over the weekend, China and the US agreed to **substantially** lower for the next 90 days the high tariffs each had imposed on the other in a tit-for-tat trade war.

Under the agreement, US duties on Chinese goods will be lowered from 145% to 30%, while China’s retaliatory tariffs on US imports will be lowered from 125% to 10%. China also removed a ban on airlines taking delivery of Boeing planes, Bloomberg reported on Tuesday.

Donald Trump hailed the talks as a “total reset” of the bilateral relationship but China’s responses made it clear that Beijing was still angry, and still blamed the US for **wreaking** economic chaos.

Meeting Latin American leaders in Beijing on Tuesday, Xi said there were “no winners in tariff wars or trade wars”.

“Bullying and hegemony will only lead to self-isolation,” he added, in reference to the US.

On Tuesday afternoon, China’s foreign ministry continued to condemn the “unreasonable” tariffs, urging the US to “stop smearing and **shifting blame**” for its fentanyl crisis on to China.

The imbalance of 10% and 30% under the agreement is because the US is keeping a 20% tariff linked to accusations that China turns a blind eye to exports of chemicals used to make fentanyl, which Beijing denies.

Chinese officials have repeatedly said Beijing opposes all tariffs and does not want to enter into a mutually **destructive** trade war but is willing to “fight to the end”.

An English-language editorial published across state media titles on Tuesday said the talks marked “a crucial step toward resolving differences”. It said China’s approach had been consistent and constructive, and it welcomed the US’s “willingness to engage in that process”.

“While we are glad to see the resumption of dialogue, we are also fully prepared for the long-term, complex and **arduous** **nature** of resolving differences between the two countries,” it said.

The tariff war has had an extraordinary impact on Chinese traders and manufacturers, with **shipments** grinding to a halt and an estimated 16m jobs at risk.

China now joins dozens of other countries in waiting to see if it can reach an agreement with the US not to restart **crushing** tariffs. On Monday, China’s commerce and finance ministries held discussions with foreign trade representatives about navigating the next three months and **weathering** the shocks of the tariffs.

Ms Bao, an assistant to the general manager of a Ningbo foreign trade company, said 30% of their **export volume** went to the US, and they were feeling cautiously optimistic about the 90-day pause.

“It’s hard to say what will happen after 90 days because we don’t know,” Bao told the Guardian. “There may be an increase in the volume of good shipping now because everyone may want to rush to ship the goods before the end of the 90 days.”

The Chinese business media outlet Caixin reported that some companies had already shifted their focus away from the US to domestic or other Asian markets instead.

On Chinese social media, where discussion of the agreement received more than half a billion engagements, views were split.

Hu Xijin, a former editor of the nationalist Chinese tabloid the Global Times, described the agreement as a “great victory for China in upholding the principles of equality and mutual respect”.

One reader commenting on the Paper’s report said: “**Persistence** is victory!”

Others were more **sarcastic** about the “victory”. “Oh, did we win again?” said one person on Weibo. “The stock indexes react like we just lose.”

On Xiaohongshu, China’s Instagram, a user likened the pause to “changing the **ventilator** … on a dying patient”. “He can breathe, but he’s still far from being able to walk **briskly**,” they wrote.

Other commenters compared the US to the boy who cried wolf and hoped that it wouldn’t “break its promises again and again”. One said: “Economically speaking, this is sort of a ceasefire.”

#### [2025-05-13 Trump must realise Putin is obstacle to peace, Zelenskyy says](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/13/volodymyr-zelenskyy-donald-trump-vladimir-putin-peace-talks-turkey)

Volodymyr Zelenskyy has said he hopes the current period of **frantic** diplomacy and **high-stakes** gambits between Russia and Ukraine will end with Donald Trump understanding that Vladimir Putin is the real obstacle to a peace deal.

“Trump needs to believe that Putin actually lies. And we should do our part. **Sensibly** approach this issue, to show that it’s not us that is slowing down the process,” said Zelenskyy, speaking to a small group of journalists, including the Guardian, in his office at the presidential administration in Kyiv.

Zelenskyy said he would travel to Turkey on Thursday whether or not Putin flew in for talks.

Zelenskyy said he had arranged to meet with the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, in Ankara, but would be ready to fly to Istanbul **at a moment’s notice** if the Russian leader **showed up**. “If Putin does not arrive and **plays games**, it is the final point that he does not want to end the war,” he said on Tuesday.

Previously, after Putin used an unexpected **late-night** Kremlin address to call for direct Russia-Ukraine negotiations in Istanbul, Zelenskyy responded by saying he would be waiting for Putin personally in Turkey on Thursday.

Trump, who is on a visit to Saudi Arabia, appeared to **float the idea** of a three-way meeting with Putin and Zelenskyy, saying on Monday: “I believe the two leaders are going to be there. I was thinking about flying over.”

Zelenskyy said he was hoping Trump would **indeed** meet him in Turkey. “If Trump travels, it will push Putin also to travel,” he said. “Trump can really help. It’s the situation where the US being present can give important guarantees.”

Trump’s Ukraine envoy, Keith Kellogg, also suggested the potential for a three-way summit. “This could be a really great meeting … We hope that President Putin will also come, and then President Trump will be there,” he told Fox News. Kellogg, as well as the US secretary of state, Marco Rubio, and the envoy Steve Witkoff are also reportedly expected in Turkey.

However, there is little sign that Putin is prepared to travel. Although he has not directly ruled it out, comments from the Kremlin suggest Russia will instead send a lower-level negotiating team to Istanbul.

“Our delegation will be there and will wait for the Ukrainian side,” said Putin’s spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, on Tuesday evening. The Russian deputy foreign minister, Sergei Ryabkov, said Russia wanted to use any talks to address the “root causes” of the conflict as Moscow sees them, including the “**denazification**” of Ukraine and the official incorporation into Russia of annexed territories – suggesting that the rhetoric of the two sides is still very far apart.

Zelenskyy said he believed that without a ceasefire agreed by the leaders, there was no point in beginning lower-level talks.

“I want you to understand why I would meet with Putin. We are not going to be able to agree on everything now. It’s impossible. We have different approaches to life, different worldviews. But we have to somehow find a way to end the war,” he said. If he and Putin could agree on a ceasefire, Zelenskyy said, then lower-level groups could meet to start hammering out details of the next steps.

He pointed to previous talks in Saudi Arabia, when the Americans acted as intermediaries between Russian and Ukrainian delegations, and a lasting full ceasefire could not be agreed. “Without signals from the leaders, or a meeting of the leaders, this **format** doesn’t work,” he said.

However, when **pressed**, he refused to rule out sending a lower-level delegation to Istanbul for talks. “I don’t know. I am being honest. Maybe the Americans, maybe someone will really want to launch this format again. I don’t know,” he said.

The back-and-forth diplomacy began with a visit to Kyiv by the leaders of Britain, France, Germany and Poland on Saturday, timed symbolically to come just one day after a **set-piece** military parade in Moscow marking 80 years since the Soviet victory in the second world war. After speaking with Trump on the phone, the four European leaders **laid down** an ultimatum to Putin that he should sign up to a 30-day ceasefire by Monday or face further sanctions. Putin rejected the ultimatum, instead offering the Istanbul talks without a ceasefire.

In the event that nothing is agreed during whatever meetings take place in Turkey this week, the big question is whether the Europeans can bring Trump along with them in their plans to ratchet up the pressure on Moscow. Zelenskyy said he hoped that new sanctions would soon be on the agenda if Thursday’s meetings came to nothing.

“I believe that President Trump is not against imposing sanctions … and I believe that there is political will in Congress to vote for these sanctions. I believe the Americans are very close to imposing these sanctions,” he said. He added that consultations would take place in the coming days – “if you’ll allow me, I won’t say where or when” – in which Europeans would be **briefed** on upcoming US sanctions plans.

The Ukrainian president has been walking a diplomatic **tightrope** in recent weeks, as Kyiv tries to keep the Trump administration on side. After the disastrous White House meeting at the end of February, Zelenskyy appears to have had some success turning the relationship around, **culminating** in a positive meeting on the sidelines of Pope Francis’s funeral in the Vatican last month.

Asked what he had said to Trump to win him back over, Zelenskyy declined to answer: “I won’t tell you. I know the reasons; in my opinion, I know why we had such a good talk. But I can’t say, I just can’t.”

British and French officials have been speaking regularly with Ukrainian counterparts since the White House **debacle** and offering **guidance** on how to mend relations with the US administration.

Zelenskyy said the contact with European allies had been closer and more frequent than ever before, and that the French president, Emmanuel Macron, was one of “two or three” leaders whom he spoke with regularly by phone. “He has a very creative approach … He’s a **risk-taker**. And risk-takers can be different kinds of people, but they are all focused on results. They don’t put themselves above everything else,” Zelenskyy said.

After his visit to Turkey, Zelenskyy is expected to visit Albania for a meeting of European politicians on Friday, and then may travel to Rome, where he suggested he could attend the **inaugural** mass of the new pope, Leo XIV, after having a positive phone call with him earlier this week.

“I think it could happen on Sunday,” Zelenskyy said. “If it works out. We don’t know what this week will bring. We have come to the moment when we don’t know what will happen tomorrow.”

#### [2025-05-14 Pakistan’s use of J-10C jets and missiles exposes potency of Chinese weaponry](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/14/pakistans-use-of-j-10c-jets-and-missiles-exposes-potency-of-chinese-arms)

As India and Pakistan **traded** missile strikes over the weekend, and the world watched with horror as the two nuclear-armed neighbours erupted into open conflict, military analysts **spotted** something curious. Pakistan, it seemed, had used Chinese jets to shoot down India’s planes.

Last week, India launched missiles at Pakistan, in retaliation for a militant attack in Indian-administered Kashmir in April that killed 26 people. The conflict escalated with mutual strikes and drone attacks.

Pakistan claimed to have shot down several Indian air force fighter jets with Chinese-made missiles fired from Chinese-made J10-C jets. The Pakistani foreign minister Ishaq Dar told parliament the Pakistani-flown fighters had taken down India’s French-made Rafales. Dar said he had informed the Chinese and they were pleased. China’s social media celebrated.

The use of J-10Cs by Pakistan would mark the first time the Chinese planes – and the PL-15 missiles they were carrying – have been used in combat anywhere in the world, giving military analysts a rare glimpse of their capabilities, and China’s military, the PLA, a crucial test case.

“Any state producing or buying weapons is keen to see how the product does in real conflict. Tests and exercises can tell most about capabilities of weapons, but the ultimate test is often combat,” said Siemon Wezeman, a senior researcher at the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute (Sipri).

China is a crucial ally of Pakistan. Sipri estimates that it is Pakistan’s biggest military weapons supplier, providing more than 80% of its stock from fighter jets to navy vessels and missiles.

Andrew Small, a Berlin-based senior fellow at the German Marshall Fund, said China gets particular benefit from seeing its weapons used against western **equivalents**. “It gives them a chance to **assess** their performance under far more complex and challenging conditions than usual, and with Pakistan this is not just about the fighter jets themselves, it’s about the missiles, the radar systems, and the whole technology spine of the Pakistani military, from electronic warfare capabilities to satellite systems.”

It’s not just western arms that China’s planes are being tested against. India has the support of both China’s biggest rival, the US, and its closest ally, Russia, which supplies 36% of India’s arms imports.

But analysts says it has provided a wake-up call about China’s military capabilities as it threatens to annex Taiwan.

“We may need to reassess the PLA’s air combat capabilities, which may be approaching or even surpassing the level of US air power deployments in east Asia,” Shu Hsiao-Huang, an associate research fellow at the Taiwan defence ministry-linked Institute of National Defense and Security Research, told Bloomberg.

Under the rule of Xi Jinping, China’s military has been modernising and expanding, with a goal to be capable of an air and land invasion of Taiwan by 2027.

Hu Xijin, the former editor of the **nationalistic** Chinese state-linked tabloid Global Times, said the incident showed Taiwan should feel “even more scared”.

Part of China’s **contingency** planning is an expectation that the US military and potentially others would be involved in defending Taiwan.

Yun Sun, director of the China programme at the Stimson Center, said the two combat theatres were not directly comparable, as a Taiwan invasion would probably involve more input from the navy, marines and army than this month’s limited conflict between India and Pakistan.

“And technically, India did not use American weapon systems during this round,” Sun said. “But the surprising victory of Chinese J-10 and PL-15 missiles will force people to reconsider the military balance of power in the event of a Taiwan contingency.”

The apparent success of the J-10C against the Rafales also boosts China’s **reputation** as a manufacturer and seller of weapons. While China is the world’s fourth largest arms exporter, more than half goes to Pakistan and the rest is mostly to smaller developed nations. It must work around US sanctions.

The share price of Chengdu Aircraft Corporation, which makes the J-10Cs, soared on the news.

Small said Pakistan was often seen as a showcase for Chinese weapons.

“A good performance demonstrates to others the benefits of maintaining a close partnership with Beijing as PLA capabilities advance, especially given the rumours that China provided Pakistan, one of its closest strategic partners, with versions of the PL-15 missiles that have a longer range than the usual export variant,” he said.

Wezeman said the shooting was too limited to draw a lot of firm conclusions about the state of China’s military, which has also been **mired** in corruption scandals in recent years.

“That said, the clash seems to support a general assessment that Chinese weapons are proving to have become a match for western weapons.”

China’s military and government have neither denied nor celebrated the J-10C claims. The foreign ministry said when asked that it was “not familiar” with the J-10C situation.

But on Tuesday China’s vice-foreign minister Sun Weidong met with Pakistan’s ambassador to China, Khalil Hashmi. “China welcomes and supports Pakistan and India achieving a comprehensive and lasting ceasefire,” a foreign ministry statement said.

“China is ready to continue to play a constructive role in this regard.”

#### [2025-05-13 US and Saudi Arabia sign $142bn arms deal as Trump to meet Syrian leader](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/may/13/us-saudi-arabia-arms-deal-trump-meeting-syria)

The United States and Saudi Arabia have signed a $142bn arms deal touted by the White House as the “largest defence sales agreement in history” in the first stop of Donald Trump’s four-day diplomatic tour to the Gulf states aimed at securing big deals and spotlighting the benefits of Trump’s transactional foreign policy.

During the trip, the White House also confirmed that Trump would meet with Syria’s new leader, Ahmed al-Sharaa, the former rebel commander whose forces helped overthrow Bashar al-Assad in 2024. The informal meeting will be the first face-to-face meeting between a US president and a Syrian leader since 2000, when Bill Clinton met with the late leader Hafez al-Assad in Geneva.

Speaking at an investment forum on Tuesday, Trump said that he planned to lift sanctions on Syria after holding talks with Saudi Arabia’s Mohammed bin Salman and Turkey’s Recep Tayyip Erdoğan. “I will be ordering the cessation of sanctions against Syria in order to give them a chance at greatness,” Trump said.

Sharaa’s pitch to woo the US president offered access to Syrian oil, reconstruction contracts and to build a Trump Tower in Damascus in exchange for the lifting of US sanctions on Syria.

Though the details of the sanctions relief were still unclear, Sharaa’s team in Damascus was celebrating.

“This is amazing, it worked,” said Radwan Ziadeh, a Syrian writer and activist who is close to the Syrian president. He shared a picture of an initial mockup of Trump Tower Damascus. “This is how you win his heart and mind,” he said, noting that Sharaa would probably show Trump the design during their meeting in Riyadh on Wednesday.

The visit was heavily focused on business interests and securing quick wins – often with characteristic Trumpian embellishment – for the administration. Saudi Arabia’s Crown Prince Mohammed pledged to invest $600bn in the United States during a lunch with Trump, including $20bn in artificial intelligence data centres, purchases of gas turbines and other energy equipment worth $14.2bn, nearly $5bn in Boeing 737-8 jets, and other deals.

But details of the specific commitments remained vague, the numbers put out by the White House did not total $600bn, and some of the programs began under Joe Biden’s administration.

The White House called the arms deal the “largest defence sales agreement in history” and said that it included plans for more than a dozen US defense companies to sell weapons, equipment and services in the areas of air force advancement and space capabilities, air and missile defense, as well as border and maritime security.

The US president was feted with a royal guard as he arrived in Riyadh on Tuesday. Royal Saudi Air Force F-15s escorted Trump’s Air Force One jet as it arrived in Riyadh and Trump sat with Salman in an ornate hall at the Royal Court at Al Yamamah Palace with members of the US and Saudi and business elite. Among them were Elon Musk, prominent figures in AI such as Sam Altman, as well the chief executives of IBM, BlackRock, Citigroup, Palantir and Nvidia, among others.

When Salman pledged that Saudi Arabia would invest $600bn in the US economy, Trump smiled and joked that it should be $1tn.

The trip is part of a reordering of Middle Eastern politics dominated by Trump’s “America first” platform of prioritising domestic US economic and security interests over foreign alliances and international law. Critics have said that the dealmaking empowers Trump and a coterie of businessmen around the president, and the US president’s family has business interests in Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Qatar, giving this administration an unprecedented conflict of interest.

The most glaring example of the new commoditisation of American foreign policy under Trump has been the proposed gift from the ruling family of Qatar of a luxury Boeing 747-8 jumbo jet that the White House said could be converted into a presidential plane and then be given to Trump’s presidential library after he leaves office.

The gift has provoked anger from congressional Democrats, one of whom described it as an “aerial palace” and said it would constitute “the most valuable gift ever conferred on a president by a foreign government”.

Trump has defended the offer, saying in a post it would “replace the 40 year old Air Force One, temporarily, in a very public and transparent transaction” and called Democrats asking for an ethics investigation “World Class Losers!!!”

The meeting between Trump and Salman was characterised by smiles and friendly backslapping, a sharp contrast to past summits when the Saudi leader was mired in controversy over the 2018 murder of journalist Jamal Khashoggi.

While his administration touted big deals, Trump also admitted that his geopolitical goals of Saudi Arabia’s diplomatic recognition of Israel would take time due in large part to the Israel’s prosecution of the war in Gaza.

“It will be a special day in the Middle East, with the whole world watching, when Saudi Arabia joins us” in the Abraham accords, the Trump administration’s framework for Arab states to recognise Israel, he said. “And I really think it’s going to be something special – but you’ll do it in your own time.”

Trump is also due to visit the United Arab Emirates on Thursday before continuing on to Qatar this week.

His negotiations in the region have been characterised by big-ticket investment deals, and those appeared to play a role in his reversal of US policy on Syria as well.

Sharaa, who is keen to normalise relations with the US, has reportedly offered Trump a number of sweeteners including the Trump tower in Damascus, a demilitarised zone by the Golan Heights that would strengthen Israel’s claim to the territory it has occupied since 1967, diplomatic recognition of Israel, and a profit-sharing deal on resources similar to the Ukraine minerals deal.

The idea to offer Trump a piece of real estate with his name on it in the heart of Damascus was thought up by a US Republican senator, who passed on the idea to Sharaa’s team.

“Sanctions in Syria are very complicated, but with Trump, he can get most of them lifted. It is a great opportunity,” Ziadeh said.

The trip is also extraordinary for Trump’s decision not to visit Israel, the US’s closest ally in the region, due to the war in Gaza and Trump’s fraught relationship with Benjamin Netanyahu. Hamas released the last remaining American hostage, Edan Alexander, on the eve of Trump’s visit to the Middle East, in an effort to push Trump to pressure Netanyahu to end the war.

Netanyahu doubled down on the war on Tuesday in a show of defiance, saying that any ceasefire would only be “temporary”.

“In the coming days, we will enter with full force to complete the operation to defeat Hamas,” he said. “Our forces are there now.”

“There will be no situation where we stop the war,” he added.

#### [2025-05-15 India blocks X accounts of Chinese state media over coverage of Kashmir crisis](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/15/india-blocks-x-accounts-of-chinese-state-media-over-coverage-of-kashmir-crisis)

The social media accounts of some Chinese state media were blocked inside India on Wednesday, after Indian officials accused the outlets of spreading Pakistani propaganda and misinformation. The move came as India protested over Beijing’s decision to rename some locations in a disputed border territory.

The X accounts of China’s official state news agency Xinhua, and a state-backed nationalistic tabloid, the Global Times, were inaccessible inside India on Wednesday. Turkey’s TRTWorld was also blocked. Both China and Turkey are allies of Pakistan, with China providing the **bulk** of its weapons purchases. On Thursday, the Global Times account was restored, reportedly after a legal request.

India has targeted thousands of social media accounts in the last week, including a number of **reputable** media outlets and reporters, sparking criticism from press freedom groups. It’s not known if the blocking of the Global Times, Xinhua, and TRT are part of the same crackdown. X, formerly Twitter, is banned inside China.

India and Pakistan have given very different **accounts** of last week’s military clashes, in what was the worst violence between the two nuclear-armed nations in decades. Unverified reporting and propaganda has been **rife** throughout social and traditional media from both sides during the short conflict.

Last week, the Indian embassy in China accused the Global Times of “pushing out … disinformation” after it carried a report claiming Pakistan had shot down an Indian warplane. India’s ministry of information and broadcasting has been contacted for comment.

After hostilities escalated between India and Pakistan, China urged restraint from both sides, however it has been seen as more supportive of Pakistan, particularly in its provisions of weaponry, including fighter jets that were reportedly involved in the shooting down of Indian warplanes – an event celebrated by Chinese media.

On Sunday, China’s government announced a new batch of “**standardised**” placenames for what it says are Chinese locations in the north-eastern state of Arunachal Pradesh – which China calls Zangnan.

The release prompted a **rebuke** from India, which called it “vain and preposterous”.

“Creative naming will not alter the undeniable reality that Arunachal Pradesh was, is, and will always remain an integral and inalienable part of India,” India’s foreign ministry spokesperson, Randhir Jaiswal, said on Wednesday.

Later that day a Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, Lin Jian, said the region was Chinese territory and the naming was “within China’s sovereign rights”.

India and China, the world’s two most populous nations, have had a fractious relationship, with **occasional** military clashes of their own along a 3,800km stretch of disputed border in the Himalayas. A deadly fight between **opposing** soldiers in 2020 saw 20 Indian soldiers and at least four Chinese soldiers killed.

#### [2025-05-15 Zelenskyy sends team for peace talks but says Russia ‘not serious enough’](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/15/zelenskyy-ukraine-russia-peace-talks-istanbul)

Volodymyr Zelenskyy has sent a delegation to Istanbul for peace talks with Russia, paving the way for the first direct negotiations between the two countries since March 2022 – although Washington has warned that no breakthrough is likely unless Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin agree to meet.

The talks are set to begin on Friday and Zelenskyy said that Kyiv would focus on pushing for an immediate 30-day ceasefire.

Speaking at a press conference in the Turkish capital, Ankara, after a meeting with President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Zelenskyy said he had decided to dispatch a delegation even though Russia had sent a lower-level team, in order to signal to Trump that Ukraine remains firmly committed to seeking an end to the war.

“Unfortunately, the Russians are not serious enough about the negotiations … **Out of respect** for President Trump and Erdoğan, I have decided to send our delegation to Istanbul now,” Zelenskyy said, adding that the delegation would be headed by his defence minister, Rustem Umerov.

Trump’s special envoy Steve Witkoff and the secretary of state, Marco Rubio, are expected to be in Istanbul on Friday, though it remains unclear what role they will play.

The talks will take place at the Dolmabahçe Palace, the grand **residence** on the European shore of the Bosphorus that hosted a fruitless round of negotiations between Moscow and Kyiv in 2022.

The much-anticipated day on Thursday **descended** into **disarray** early on with the Ukrainian and Russian delegations arriving in separate cities hundreds of miles apart, casting immediate doubt over whether they would meet at all.

On Wednesday evening the Kremlin had announced that Putin would skip the talks, rejecting Zelenskyy’s bold proposal for a face-to-face meeting to discuss peace.

**Looming over** it all was Trump, who raised doubts over the value of any talks that did not involve him and the Russian president. “Nothing’s going to happen until Putin and I get together,” he told reporters onboard Air Force One.

Echoing Trump, Rubio told reporters late on Thursday: “I think it’s **abundantly** clear that the only way we’re going to have a breakthrough here is between President Trump and President Putin.” He said any meeting between the two would depend on progress this week.

The remarks will **dampen** hopes in Kyiv and among its European allies that Trump is prepared to impose tough sanctions if the current talks collapse before he gets the chance to meet Putin – in effect leaving Moscow with little incentive to compromise in Turkey.

Speaking during a stop in Qatar on Thursday before heading to the UAE, Trump suggested he might still travel to Turkey on Friday “if something happened” at the talks. But by **nightfall** there was little sign that any **last-minute** summit involving the US president was in the works.

Zelenskyy and Putin have each been **manoeuvring** to position themselves **favourably** in front of Trump, who has grown increasingly impatient with the slow pace of the talks, with each leader **casting** the other as the main obstacle to progress.

Zelenskyy said: “I believe the most important thing for Ukraine is to remain constructive and reasonable. That’s why we’re sending a delegation led by the defence ministry – so that no one can claim Ukraine is responsible for **derailing** the talks.”

Zelenskyy had travelled to Ankara with a team of his closest aides on Thursday, while Russia’s mid-level delegation, led by Vladimir Medinsky, an **ultra-conservative**, landed earlier in the day in Istanbul, where hundreds of journalists **camped out** for hours awaiting without success the start of the talks.

Throughout the conference in Ankara, Zelenskyy sought to **frame** Russia’s choice of delegation as a sign to Trump that Moscow was not approaching the talks **in good faith**. He told reporters that the Russian delegation that arrived in Istanbul did not include “anyone who actually makes decisions”, accusing Moscow of not making efforts to end the war seriously.

“I feel disrespected by Russia. No meeting time, no agenda, no high-level delegation – this is a personal disrespect … to Erdoğan, to Trump,” Zelenskyy said. “We can’t be running around the world looking for Putin,” he added when asked whether the Russian president was avoiding a direct meeting with him.

But there is little evidence so far that Trump is **receptive** to Zelenskyy’s **plea**, with the US leader on Thursday refusing to criticise the Russian delegation.

Any hopes of a serious breakthrough appear to have been **dashed** by Putin’s decision not to send his two most senior diplomats, Yuri Ushakov and Sergei Lavrov, and instead delegate the talks to lower-ranking aides.

Observers say that by appointing Medinsky, a former culture minister, to lead the delegation, Putin is signalling he has little interest in genuine compromise and **remains committed to** the same objectives he pursued in 2022: **stripping** Ukraine of its sovereignty and military capability.

Medinsky, who also led the failed peace talks in March 2022, held a hastily arranged press conference at the Russian **consulate** in Istanbul. He described the current negotiations as a continuation of those earlier talks, which included sweeping demands such as limiting Ukraine’s armed forces and blocking it from rebuilding with western support. Kyiv has repeatedly rejected those terms as unacceptable.

Medinsky also echoed a **well-worn** Kremlin talking point, saying Russia aimed to address the “root causes” of the war – a phrase frequently used by Putin to justify the invasion.

Boris Bondarev, a former senior Russian diplomat who resigned after Russia’s full invasion of Ukraine, said: “Putin clearly doesn’t want any genuine peace talks, nor any ceasefire, unless it’s entirely **on his terms**.”

Bondarev said Putin had **proposed** the talks in Turkey with the aim of **convincing** Trump he was committed to peace, while he remained intent on continuing the fighting on the ground.

With Russian forces making slow but steady progress on the battlefield, Putin – seemingly confident that Russia can outlast Ukraine – is refusing to halt the fighting before securing major concessions from Kyiv and the west.

Even before Moscow and Kyiv meet in Istanbul, Zelenskyy and Ukraine’s European allies were urging the US to impose new sanctions if the sides fail to agree on a ceasefire.

“If there is no ceasefire, no bilateral meetings, we are asking for sanctions to end the war more quickly,” Zelenskyy said. “We want a strong package of sanctions against Russia from the US, European countries – there must be pressure from the global south.

“Trump’s position is to put pressure on both sides. I believe that we were put under more pressure,” Zelenskyy said, adding that Ukraine had “step by step demonstrated a willingness for negotiations”.

He said: “You have to pressurise the side that does not want to end the war.”

#### [2025-05-18 US treasury secretary says Walmart will ‘eat some of the tariffs’ after Trump demand](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/may/18/trump-walmart-tariffs)

The US retail giant Walmart will “eat some of the tariffs” in line with Donald Trump’s demands, the president’s treasury secretary Scott Bessent insisted on Sunday, claiming he received the assurance in a personal phone call with the company’s chief executive, Doug McMillon.

A spokesperson for Walmart said the company would not comment on conversations between its executives and administration officials. However, a source familiar with the conversation said the phone call between Bessent and McMillon was arranged many days prior to Trump’s post – and that the company’s position had not changed.

Walmart said this week it had no alternative to raising prices for consumers beginning later this month because it could not **absorb** the cost of the president’s tariffs on international trade, which have caused turmoil in international markets.

The statement provoked an angry response from Trump, who posted a **rant** to his Truth Social network on Saturday saying the company should “eat the tariffs and not charge **valued** customers anything”.

According to Bessent, speaking on Sunday to NBC’s Meet the Press, Walmart is now promising exactly that.

“I was on the phone with Doug McMillon, the CEO of Walmart, yesterday. And Walmart is, in fact, going to, as you describe it, eat some of the tariffs, just as they did in ‘18, ‘19, and ‘20,” Bessent said after host Kristen Welker asked if the president was asking American companies to be less profitable.

“What you’re describing was Walmart’s **earnings** call. The other thing the companies have to do – they have to give the worst case scenario so that they’re not **sued**.”

On Thursday, McMillon said in the earnings call that his company, a **bellwether** of US consumer health, was moving to protect itself against the impacts of Trump’s tariffs, despite the president’s administration announcing a pause in its trade war with China that analysts called “capitulation day”.

“We will do our best to keep our prices as low as possible but **given** the magnitude of the tariffs, even at the reduced levels announced this week, we aren’t able to absorb all the pressure given the reality of narrow retail **margins**,” he said.

Walmart’s chief financial officer, John Rainey, told CNBC that the company, which has thousands of stores across the US, was “wired for everyday low prices”. But he said the tariffs were “more than any retailer can absorb” – and that consumers would begin to see higher prices towards the end of May and “certainly much more in June”.

Trump announced plans for an unprecedented barrage of tariffs against numerous countries on 2 April, a date he called “liberation day”.

For too long, he said, the US had been “**looted**, **pillaged**, **raped** and **plundered** by nations near and far”, and he presented a list of countries and territories that would receive tariffs, ranging from numerous US allies and longtime trade partners to **barren**, remote islands near **Antarctica** occupied only by **penguins**.

The president’s strategy, which he insisted would lead to negotiations and trade deals with at least 150 countries, was variously ridiculed and condemned as **flawed** and unworkable. And it created an ongoing six weeks of chaos with higher prices, crashing stock markets and slowing economic growth.

He has since attempted to walk back many of the **excesses** of the policy, including this week’s announcement that, for an initial 90-day period, tariffs on China – a dominant supplier to Walmart and **myriad** other US companies – would be cut from 145% to 30%.

The White House called it a “total reset” in trade relations and followed up on Friday by announcing that it would not, after all, negotiate with many of the countries, but instead unilaterally impose new tariff rates.

“It is not possible to meet the number of people that want to see us,” Trump told a meeting of business leaders in the United Arab Emirates during his tour of Gulf states.

“We have 150 countries that want to make a deal, but you’re not able to see that many countries.”

Bessent told CNN’s State of the Union in a later appearance on Sunday that the US was focused on its “18 most important trading relationships” – and that he expected trade talks to continue with a number of countries leading to a series of regional deals.

#### [2025-05-19 Runaway rice prices spell danger for Japan’s prime minister as elections loom](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/19/runaway-rice-prices-spell-danger-for-japans-prime-minister-as-elections-loom)

Japan’s government is battling record-low approval ratings as consumers voice anger at soaring rice prices just weeks before key national elections.

Attempts to bring down the price of the Japanese **staple** have had little effect, prompting calls for a reduction in the consumption (sales) tax to ease the cost-of-living crisis.

A new poll by the Kyodo news agency found that consumers blamed the administration of the prime minister, Shigeru Ishiba, for rising pressure on household finances.

Approval ratings for Ishiba’s cabinet stand at 27.4%, according to the poll, the lowest since he took office last October and a **dip** of more than five percentage points in the past month, Kyodo said.

Ishiba’s ruling Liberal Democratic party (LDP) has so far ruled out a cut in the 10% consumption tax, which **promises** to be a focal point of upper house elections in July.

Ishiba is already under pressure after the LDP and its **junior** coalition partner lost their lower house majority last autumn. Significant losses in the upper house will only add to calls from opponents inside the party for him to go.

Almost three-quarters of **respondents** said the tax, which is levied on a wide range of goods and services, should be cut “only for food items”, “for all products” or be abolished altogether, the poll found.

More worrying for Ishiba, just over 87% of respondents said government efforts to **rein** in the price of rice had been “insufficient”, while more than 74% said they did not expect ongoing US-Japan tariff talks – including negotiations on American imports of rice and other **foodstuffs** – to end favourably to Japan.

Earlier this year Ishiba’s government took the unusual step of dipping into its vast rice reserves. In March it began releasing stockpiled rice in an attempt to arrest price rises that have been blamed on a combination of factors, including higher demand fuelled in part by the tourism boom, distribution bottlenecks, and suspected **hoarding** by **wholesalers** and distributors in anticipation of further shortages.

But the move, which is usually reserved for shortages caused by natural disasters and crop failures, did not have the desired effect, with prices of domestic rice falling only **marginally**.

The price of rice sold in supermarkets averaged ¥4,214 ($29) for 5kg during the week to 4 May, according to the agriculture ministry. That is ¥18 cheaper than the all-time high recorded a week earlier, but still around double the price at the same time last year.

In response, the government said last week it would double the supply of stockpiled rice, with an additional 300,000 tons due for release in the three months to July, media reports said. That is on top of 300,000 tons that has already been released from emergency stockpiles since March. In addition, some of the rice will bypass wholesalers so it can reach shops more quickly.

The mounting rice crisis has forced more Japanese restaurants and consumers to turn to cheaper imports. In April, Japan imported South Korean rice for the first time in a quarter of a century.

Last week, the supermarket chain Aeon said it would start selling US-produced Calrose rice from early next month. A 4kg bag will cost about 10% less than Japanese rice.

#### [2025-05-19 Trump and Putin hold phone call but Kremlin refuses Ukraine ceasefire](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/19/trump-and-putin-hold-phone-call-but-kremlin-refuses-ukraine-ceasefire)

Vladimir Putin and Donald Trump have held a rare phone call, which the US leader described as “excellent”, but the Kremlin refused to agree to a ceasefire in the war with Ukraine, despite pressure from Washington and European allies.

Speaking to reporters in Sochi after the two-hour conversation on Monday, Putin described the call as “very meaningful and frank” and said he was prepared to work with Ukraine on drafting a memorandum for future peace talks.

However, the Russian leader declined to support the US-proposed 30-day unconditional ceasefire, which Ukraine had already agreed to – and which Washington had framed as the call’s primary objective. Putin also suggested his country’s maximalist objectives in the war with Ukraine were unchanged.

In contrast, Trump offered a far more positive spin, saying in a post on his Truth Social network that the talks went “very well”.

“The tone and spirit of the conversation were excellent … Russia and Ukraine will immediately start negotiations toward a Ceasefire and, more importantly, an END to the War,” he wrote, suggesting that the Vatican should host future Russia-Ukraine negotiations.

Trump’s statement after the call with Putin also suggested the US would be stepping back from the negotiations. He said the conditions for a deal could only be negotiated by the “**warring** parties”, despite his earlier claim that he could end the war in a single day.

Trump later said it would be “great” to hold peace talks at the Vatican, but again suggested the US could abandon its involvement, telling reporters that if there is no progress: “I’m just going to back away.”

Beyond Trump’s **occasionally** optimistic rhetoric, no breakthrough appears in sight. Despite previously demanding an immediate ceasefire and backing Europe’s ultimatum for Russia to halt hostilities, he now appears to be once again **easing off** pressure on Moscow. He made no mention of his previous threats to impose sanctions on Russia if it did not agree to halt the fighting.

Moscow has consistently rejected extended ceasefire proposals, arguing they would give Ukraine time to rearm and regroup at a time Russian forces are making battlefield advances.

On Monday, Putin claimed Russia supported a halt to hostilities, but said it was necessary to “identify the most effective paths toward peace”.

**Crucially**, Putin repeated his longstanding **refrain** that the “root causes” of the war must be addressed: a reference to Russia’s far-reaching demands that would severely undermine Ukraine’s sovereignty.

These demands include forcing Ukraine to “denazify” and demilitarise, cutting back its armed forces, barring it from receiving western military support, and imposing **sweeping limits** on its sovereignty.

Since Trump’s re-election, Putin has been engaged in a delicate balancing act with the US president, appearing to support peace talks to stay in Trump’s favour, while pushing for terms that in effect amount to Ukraine’s capitulation.

In an apparent show of confidence and **nonchalance**, Putin took the call with Trump on Monday while touring a music school in Sochi. His **bravado** is fuelled by Russia’s slow but steady battlefield gains, Europe’s **disjointed** response, and a domestic economy increasingly adapted for a prolonged war.

Trump said he spoke with Zelenskyy and several European leaders after his call with Putin.

In a statement late on Monday, Zelenskyy insisted Ukraine was ready for a full ceasefire and direct negotiations with Moscow, but said: “If the Russians are not ready to stop the killings, there must be stronger sanctions. Pressure on Russia will push it toward real peace.”

He added: “If Putin puts forward unrealistic demands, this will mean that Russia continues to drag out the war, and deserves that Europe, America, and the world act accordingly, including with further sanctions. Russia must end the war it started, and it can begin doing so any day.”

Zelenskyy also rejected Russia’s demands for Ukraine to withdraw its troops from the Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions, which Russia claims to have annexed but does not fully control. “No one will withdraw our troops from our territories,” he told reporters.

The Ukrainian leader also urged the US not to “distance itself from the talks and the **pursuit** of peace”.

“The only one who benefits from that is Putin,” he said.

The flurry of diplomatic activity on Monday came days after the first meeting between Russian and Ukrainian delegations in three years, held in Istanbul. Those talks broke down after Russia demanded more territory as a condition for halting the fighting.

#### [2025-05-20 Taiwan president calls for peace and dialogue with China amid heightened military activity](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/20/taiwan-president-calls-for-peace-and-dialogue-with-china-amid-heightened-military-activity)

Taiwan’s president has reiterated calls for peace and dialogue with China as he marked one year in office, amid heightened Chinese military activity and **worsening** political division at home.

Lai Ching-te, who was inaugurated a year ago, told reporters on Tuesday that a war would have “no winners”, but Taiwan would continue to strengthen its defences to **ward off** a Chinese invasion or attempt to annex it by force.

“It is the aggressor who undermines peace … Taiwan is a peace-loving nation, and our society values **goodwill**,” he said on Tuesday in response to questions after his formal address. “I am deeply committed to peace, because peace is priceless, and in war there are no winners.”

“However, **whilst** our pursuit of peace is sincere, it must not be naive.”

He urged Beijing to restart dialogue with his government on equal terms, “using exchanges to replace **hemming in**, dialogue to replace confrontation”.

China’s ruling Communist party (CCP) cut all ties and dialogue with Taiwan’s government when Lai’s predecessor, Tsai Ing-wen, won the 2016 election for their pro-sovereignty Democratic Progressive party. The CCP considers the party to be unlawful separatists.

In response to the president’s speech, China’s official state media, Xinhua, accused Lai of “deliberately escalating” cross-Strait tensions.

“Since taking office, the Lai Ching-te administration has **brazenly** pursued ‘Taiwan independence’ to **serve** partisan and personal gain, charging **headlong** down a path of division and confrontation that threatens the peace and stability of the Taiwan Strait,” it said.

In recent weeks China’s military launched larger than usual numbers of planes and ships into Taiwan’s air defence identification zone – an average of about 20 planes and 11 navy and coastguard ships each day.

Taiwan authorities had publicly warned of likely Chinese retaliation or pre-emptive activity in response to the speech. Last week government officials told reporters they couldn’t rule out military drills in the days after Lai spoke, and on Monday the coast guard said Beijing could launch “political warfare” to disrupt public **morale** in Taiwan.

Lai has taken a more publicly assertive stance against China’s aggression than his predecessor Tsai, which analysts had been expecting his inauguration anniversary speech to continue. Earlier this month he said Taiwan was facing a similar threat to Europe in the 1930s.

However the speech on Tuesday in the end made no mention of China or its annexation plans, and his related comments only came in response to questions in the subsequent press conference. Instead the speech focused on domestic pledges to reduce carbon emissions, plans to deal with the US Trump administration’s punitive tariffs, and domestic political turmoil.

“The trade de-escalation reached between Beijing and Washington has generated anxiety in Taipei over whether the issue of Taiwan may emerge in future US-China talks,” said Amanda Hsiao, a director in Eurasia Group’s China practice, referring to fears Beijing may seek a **softening** of the US’s longstanding support of Taiwan. “This uncertainty may be a factor for why Lai chose not to reiterate his views on the China threat in a high profile speech.”

Amid worsening domestic political turmoil Lai announced he would offer national security briefings to the chair of the main opposition party, the Kuomintang (KMT). The KMT and another rival party, the TPP, control the majority of seats in Taiwan’s **legislature** and have been accused of blocking Lai’s agenda.

The opposition parties have accused Lai and his Democratic Progressive party of increasing tensions with China and **stifling** opposition. In the name of national security, Lai’s administration has increased scrutiny of Chinese-born people in Taiwan, and cracked down on public statements that support Beijing’s goals.

The KMT welcomed the new briefings as Lai having “finally taken a small step” to end partisan conflict, but said he had much more to do.

#### [2025-05-20 Israel still blocking aid for Gaza despite promise to lift siege, says UN](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/20/israel-still-blocking-aid-for-gaza-despite-promise-to-lift-siege-says-un)

Two days after Benjamin Netanyahu announced he was lifting the siege of Gaza, Israel is still blocking food from reaching starving Palestinians, the UN has said, as the leader of the country’s **centre-left** Democrats party said his country was becoming a pariah nation that “kills babies as a hobby”.

Only five trucks of aid had reached Gaza by Tuesday afternoon and aid workers had not been given permission to distribute even that **token** shipment, Jens Laerke, spokesperson for the UN humanitarian office (Ocha) told a Geneva press briefing.

Israeli authorities have approved “around 100” other trucks to enter Gaza but not yet let them cross, he said. Even that shipment would do little to reduce widespread hunger after 11 weeks of near total siege; it is just a fifth of what reached Gaza daily before the war, when people were well-fed.

Israeli officials responsible for aid distribution in Gaza said 93 trucks had entered Gaza on Tuesday but did not respond to questions about whether the food and medicines they carried had been authorised for distribution.

Looming **famine** in the territory has provoked international outrage and heavy diplomatic pressure on Israel’s prime minister to allow food to reach more than 2 million people trapped in Gaza.

On Sunday night Netanyahu announced he was ending the siege on Gaza because a “starvation crisis” would damage his country’s global **standing**.

Yair Golan, the leader of the opposition Democrats who served as deputy chief of **staff** for Israel’s military before entering politics, said that after an **unjustifiably** brutal campaign, much of the damage had already been done.

Netanyahu’s government was making the country as isolated as **apartheid**-era South Africa, he told Reshet Bet radio.

“A **sane** country doesn’t engage in fighting against civilians, doesn’t kill babies as a hobby and doesn’t set the expulsion of a population as a goal,” he said.

Netanyahu attacked Golan’s comments as “**contemptible** **antisemitic** blood **libels** against IDF soldiers and the state of Israel”, but Golan later doubled down on his position in a press conference.

Israel’s war in Gaza begun as a just campaign, he said, after Hamas killed about 1,200 people and kidnapped 250, in cross-border attacks on 7 October 2023, but had become a **corrupt** war. The left had been too frightened to speak out and should condemn what was happening more vocally, he added.

For most of the war, opposition to Netanyahu among Jewish Israelis has focused on the failure to bring back hostages or the conduct of the campaign, rather than the deaths of Palestinians in Gaza, or the hunger and destruction there.

The few who have focused on Palestinian suffering have faced harsh **policing** under the far-right security minister, Itamar Ben-Gvir.

On Monday police arrested anti-war activists who went to protest near the Gaza border holding images of Palestinian children killed in Israeli airstrikes, detaining them overnight before releasing them to **house arrest**. They included Alon-Lee Green, co-director of Palestinian-Israeli campaign group Standing Together.

“While peaceful demonstrators are dragged before the courts, rightwing extremist **settlers** are allowed to enter Gaza illegally, carry out attacks on Palestinians in the West Bank and hold settlement conferences on the Gaza border with full **impunity**, revealing a dangerous double standard in the state’s use of force,” Standing Together said in a statement.

Inside Gaza, Israel’s intensifying ground and air campaign added to the misery caused by widespread hunger.

Israeli strikes on Tuesday killed at least 85 people, including attacks on a family home and a school used as a shelter in northern Gaza that killed at least 22 people, more than half of them women and children, Gaza’s health ministry said.

Israel earlier in the week issued evacuation orders for all of central Khan Younis, the second largest city in the Strip, declaring it a “combat zone”, and ordering its exhausted and hungry **inhabitants** to displace themselves again.

Most people in the Strip have moved repeatedly in attempts to escape Israeli airstrikes, though no part of Gaza has been spared attacks.

The death toll from Israeli attacks has now passed 53,000, more than half of them civilians. There are more than 28,000 women and children among the dead, UN Women said this week.

#### [2025-05-20 Uneasy India-Pakistan ceasefire holds but is a return to war inevitable?](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/20/uneasy-india-pakistan-ceasefire-holds-but-is-a-return-to-war-inevitable)

Against the **odds**, the ceasefire that followed India and Pakistan’s almost-war has held; fragile, uneasy but still unbroken. Yet in the aftermath of four days of cross-border drones and missile strikes – the most technologically advanced conflict either side has ever engaged in – the question remains: what now?

While both India and Pakistan have claimed victory, some experts fear that a return to hostilities is almost inevitable.

There is a sense among analysts and diplomats that Delhi has not emerged from the conflict as **triumphant** as it had hoped, leaving little room for further de-escalation or political engagement. In a speech last week, India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, insisted that the military offensive against Pakistani terror groups, named Operation Sindhoor, was still continuing and that the ceasefire was simply a pause.

Meanwhile, Pakistan’s army, after going through a period of **reputational** decline, is once again the country’s most **revered** institution – proving that nothing works better for the fortunes of Pakistan’s generals than an altercation with India.

“India has made it clear they are still on a state of alert,” said Chietigj Bajpaee, a senior research fellow for south Asia at the Chatham House thinktank. He was **sceptical** that India’s missile strikes into Pakistan had done much to deter any future militant attacks, which India’s defence minister said would be taken as an “act of war”.

“With the hyper-nationalist rhetoric we are still seeing from both sides, it seems like there’s limited space for any lasting rapprochement,” said Bajpaee.

While India is seen to have achieved some tactical victories – successfully targeting known militant bases in Pakistan, firing targeted missiles into Rawalpindi, the heart of Pakistan’s military and largely **rebuffing** Pakistani missiles – the strategic wins have been more **elusive**.

Instead, India is now grappling with some more uncomfortable outcomes. As noted by Pratap Bhanu Mehta, an Indian political scientist, in his Indian Express column, the armed conflict has “no decisive victory and no clear political end simply **reinstates** the India-Pakistan **hyphenation**” – a reference to an age-old **tendency** to lump the two countries together as a **singular** **quarrelling** entity on the international stage. In recent years, as India soared ahead of Pakistan and positioned itself as a global economic and geopolitical superpower, there was a feeling in the corridors of New Delhi that they had broken free of the hyphenation **burden**. However, recent events showed that **perceptions**, particularly in the US, had not changed much.

Among diplomats and observers, the view was that India had been left on the back foot in the critical battle over narrative. The deep-rooted **instinct** of the Modi government to tightly control the flow of information (Modi has not done an in-person press conference in 10 years) meant that as Operation Sindhoor was launched, their accounts of the operation were limited to a few brief, highly **choreographed** press conferences led by civil servants.

In Pakistan meanwhile, ministers were at the end of the phone and on TV news shows **non-stop**, briefing the world constantly on the Pakistani version of events, such as claims that Pakistan had downed five Indian military jets. The Modi government has still not publicly responded to the allegation, but instead put pressure on Indian news outlets to avoid any mention of the alleged downed planes.

Amid vast information gaps left by the Indian government an unprecedented amount of misinformation and disinformation **proliferated**. False claims fuelled an **insatiable** appetite for war among the Indian public.

As a result, on 10 May, when Donald Trump **abruptly** announced a ceasefire before India or Pakistan had a chance, it was met with a widespread reaction of betrayal and anger in India. Many could not understand why the government would agree to a ceasefire, let alone one that seemed to have been imposed by the US. The fury among the hyper-nationalist far right – Modi’s political base and where much of the disinformation originated – was particularly **potent** and the **clamour** for a return to war has still not entirely **dissipated**.

Trump’s boastful claims of brokering the ceasefire have been a source of frustration to New Delhi. While he joins a long line of US presidents who have been drawn into disputes between the neighbours, it is historically done far more **discreetly** and largely on terms favourable to India.

This time, India was so **infuriated** at Trump’s version of events, including that coercion over trade led both sides to lay down arms, that it openly **repudiated** several of the president’s statements.

Trump’s involvement has also resulted in another strategic upset for India: the re-internationalisation of the Kashmir issue. India’s **immovable** position is that its dispute with Pakistan over the region, which dates back to 1947, is a purely internal issue that should have no outside interference or third-party negotiation. But in **flagrant** disregard for this, Trump offered, post-ceasefire, to mediate between the two countries to find a “solution”. Pakistan **leapt at** the offer; in India it was met with **stony** silence.

The Indian political strategist Brahma Chellaney accused Trump of “playing right into the hands of Pakistan which has long weaponised the Kashmir issue to justify its export of terror”.

Much remains up in the air between the two sides. The land border between the countries is still closed and both sides are still denying visas. Perhaps most critically, the Indus River treaty, which ensures Pakistan gets a vital supply of river water from India, remains suspended by New Delhi.

But while among the political class in Islamabad there is **optimistic chatter** of post-ceasefire talks in the Gulf or London – where even Kashmir could be on the table – New Delhi has avoided the subject. “The **dilemma** is that this war does not compel negotiations. Nor is it likely to build even a **modicum** of trust that can allow a political negotiation,” wrote Mehta.

On a deeper, **existential** level, analysts say there remains little incentive on either side to de-escalate. In India, anti-Pakistan fervour has only driven up support for Modi and helped his strongman Hindu nationalist government win elections. In Pakistan, the ever-present threat of India has long been used to justify the dominating role of the military in running the country.

Bajpaee is among those who has a **pessimistic** view of any suggestion of post-conflict political dialogue between the two countries, calling that a “dead end” as both sides are “essentially talking past each other”.

“It seems very unlikely that we’re going to see any sort of credible peace process,” he said. “Frankly, at this point I would say it’s not a question of if, but when we will see a resumption of some sort of military hostilities between both countries.”

#### [2025-05-21 Japanese minister resigns after saying he doesn’t buy rice because he gets it free](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/21/japan-farm-minister-resigns-rice-price)

Japan’s agriculture minister has resigned after saying he never buys rice because he gets it free, a remark that drew public fury in a country facing soaring food prices.

Taku Etō’s resignation has added to pressure on the prime minister, Shigeru Ishiba, whose failure to rein in soaring rice prices and address a wider cost of living crisis has angered voters ahead of upper house elections in July.

“Just now I submitted my resignation to prime minister Ishiba,” Etō told reporters at the prime minister’s office.

Etō had faced calls for his resignation after claiming that he never had to buy rice, relying instead on gifts from supporters.

Etō had initially sympathised with the “hardship” felt by consumers after the government released about 300,000 tons of rice from emergency stockpiles earlier this year in the hope of bringing down prices. But speaking at a **fundraiser** last weekend, Etō said he had “never bought rice myself because my supporters donate so much to me that I can **practically** sell it”.

Etō was replaced on Wednesday by Shinjirō Koizumi, a former environment minister who ran unsuccessfully against Ishiba for the Liberal Democratic party (LDP) leadership last autumn.

Etō’s comment **incensed** consumers, who are having to pay nearly double for a bag of rice compared with a year ago, according to figures published in April.

“I asked myself whether it is appropriate for me to stay at the **helm** of the agriculture ministry at a critical time for rice prices, and I concluded that it is not,” Etō added, according to the Kyodo news agency.

“Once again, I apologise to people for making extremely inappropriate comments as minister when they are struggling with surging rice prices.”

Japan’s rice **shortfall** has been blamed on several factors, including poor harvests due to hot weather in 2023 and panic-buying prompted by a “megaquake” warning in 2024. Wholesalers and distributors are also thought to be hoarding rice stocks in anticipation of further shortages.

Ishiba had earlier apologised for Etō’s remarks.

The ongoing rice crisis and rising household food and energy bills have **dented** the popularity of Ishiba’s government, weeks before it faces voters in upper house elections that could determine his future as prime minister.

In a recent Kyodo survey, 87% of respondents were dissatisfied with the government’s handling of the rice prices, while approval ratings for Ishiba’s cabinet have sunk to their lowest since he took office last October.

The average price of rice sold at supermarkets in the week to 11 May reached a record ¥4,268 yen ($29) for 5kg, up from ¥4,214 the previous week and around double the price of a year ago.

In April, Japan imported rice from South Korea for the first time in a quarter of a century in an attempt to address growing consumer anger.

Junya Ogawa, secretary general of the main opposition Constitutional Democratic party, described Etō’s comments as “extremely inappropriate, **out of touch** and intolerable”.

Etō conceded that his remarks had angered his wife. “She told me that she does buy rice when the donated rice runs out,” he said. “It’s not like our family is living entirely off of rice given to us as gifts.”

#### [2025-05-22 World’s seven wealthiest countries agree to counter China’s trade practices](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/22/g7-china-trade)

Top finance officials from the world’s seven wealthiest democracies have set aside **stark differences** on US tariffs and agreed to counter global “economic imbalances”, a swipe at China’s **trade practices**.

Ahead of the meeting of G7 finance ministers and central bank governors there had been doubt about whether there would be a final **communique**, given divisions over US tariffs and Washington’s **reluctance** to refer to Russia’s war on Ukraine as illegal.

But after talks that stretched over three days, participants signed a lengthy document that was **devoid** of previous **language** on fighting climate change, left out their traditional defence of free trade and softened references to the Ukraine war.

“We found common ground on the most **pressing** global issues that we face,” Canadian finance minister Francois-Philippe Champagne told the closing press conference on Thursday.

“I think it sends a very clear signal to the world ... that the G7 is united in purpose and in action.”

The communique said the G7 members would continue to monitor “nonmarket policies and practices”, which contribute to imbalances in global trade. The statement did not mention China, but “nonmarket policies” typically refer to that country’s export subsidies and currency policies that the Trump administration says give it an advantage in international trade.

The high-profile gathering of officials from the US, Canada, the UK, Japan, Germany, France and Italy appeared to be more **congenial** than an earlier meeting of G7 foreign ministers in March. That meeting, also in Canada, occurred as Donald Trump was in the middle of threatening **stiff** tariffs on Canada and suggesting it could become the 51st state.

US treasury secretary Scott Bessent told AFP: “I don’t think there were any major disagreements, I thought the meeting went great.”

German finance minister Lars Klingbeil told reporters it was crucial to “resolve the current trade disputes as quickly as possible,” as tariffs had placed “a heavy burden on the global economy”.

“Our hand is **extended**,” Klingbeil added.

French finance minister Eric Lombard said: “The atmosphere was warm … We don’t agree on everything, but we talked about everything.”

The G7 statement did not mention the US tariffs, which have disrupted global trade and supply chains and added economic uncertainty.

Champagne downplayed the lack of communique language on tariffs, but said ministers “were not **skating around**” the issue and discussed the effects during the meeting. Canada is seeking a deal to eliminate Trump’s 25% tariffs on many goods, including steel and **aluminium**.

“We’re trying to enhance growth and stability. And obviously tariffs are something in that context that you can’t avoid discussing,” Champagne said.

The Chinese embassy in Ottawa said it could not immediately comment on the G7 statement.

The G7 finance chiefs also condemned what they called Russia’s “continued brutal war” against Ukraine and said that if efforts to achieve a ceasefire failed, they would explore all possible options, including “further ramping up sanctions.”

The description of the Ukraine war was **watered down** from the prior G7 statement issued in October, before Trump’s re-election, calling it an “illegal, unjustifiable, and unprovoked war of aggression against Ukraine”.

Trump has diminished US support for Ukraine and has made statements suggesting that Kyiv was to blame for the conflict as he tries to **coax** Russia into peace talks.

Diplomatic efforts to end the conflict have accelerated in recent weeks, with Russian and Ukrainian officials holding their first face-to-face talks in more than three years last week in Istanbul.

But the Kremlin said on Thursday that new peace talks with Ukraine had “yet to be agreed,” disputing reports the two nations would soon hold negotiations at the Vatican.

The finance meeting sets the stage for a G7 leaders summit June 15-17 in the nearby mountain **resort** area of Kananaskis. Trump will attend the summit, the White House confirmed on Thursday.

#### [2025-05-23 Satellite images reveal damage to North Korea warship after ‘criminal’ launch accident](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/23/north-korea-ship-satellite-images-launch-accident-damage-failure-warship-destroyer)

Satellite images have revealed the extent of a navy **shipyard** accident in North Korea that resulted in serious damage to a warship and **infuriated** the country’s leader Kim Jong-un.

On Wednesday, Kim watched as the 5,000-ton destroyer was partly “crushed” during its launch at the north-eastern shipyard of Chongjin. Kim called the incident a “criminal act” that could not be tolerated, according to state media.

Images taken by satellite show the warship lying on its side, with the bow of the vessel on land, while a large portion of the **stern** lies in the water. The **stricken** ship has been covered by large blue **tarpaulins**.

North Korea said it had has begun a full-scale investigation into the accident.

Pyongyang has said the incident on Wednesday was caused by a loss of balance while the vessel was being **launched**, and sections of the bottom of the warship were crushed.

An internal inspection found that there were no holes in the warship’s bottom, but the **starboard** **hull** was **scratched** and seawater flowed into the stern section through the rescue channel, the report said.

The extent of damage was “not serious,” the report said, adding the investigation group had been ordered to find the cause of the accident and those responsible for it. The report did not mention any injuries or deaths as a result of it.

The **mishap** likely occurred in front of a large crowd, increasing the public humiliation for Kim, military analysts said.

South Korea’s military said on Thursday that the ship was lying on its side in the water.

“The stern is seen swung out into the harbour as a result of the wheeled units placed under the frame sliding into the water while the bow remained on the side **slipway**,” said the US-based Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), citing satellite imagery.

The shipyard in Chongjin has primarily produced **cargo** vessels and fishing vessels and “undoubtedly lacks significant **expertise**” in launching large warships such as the new destroyer, CSIS added.

It would take two to three days to restore the balance of the warship by pumping up seawater from the flooded chamber and about 10 days to restore the warship’s side, the KCNA report said, citing experts’ estimates.

Treating the accident as a serious matter was part of an effort to fight against “**incautiousness**” and “**irresponsibility**,” according to KCNA.

Hong Kil Ho, the manager of the Chongjin shipyard, was summoned to the law enforcement organ on Thursday as it began measures to detain and investigate those responsible for the accident, the report said.

#### [2025-05-24 As Trump focuses on his trade war, Brazil and China forge closer ties](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/24/as-trump-focuses-on-his-trade-war-brazil-and-china-forge-closer-ties)

Few world leaders can say they’ve been hugged by Xi Jinping, China’s typically **reserved** president. Last year, an **embrace** between Xi and his Russian counterpart, Vladimir Putin, seemed to **sum up** the **cosy** – if **at times** slightly awkward – relationship between China and Russia.

Now Brazil’s president, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, can count himself among the **hallowed** few to have broken the handshake barrier with Chinese leader. Stepping off the stage after giving a speech in Beijing earlier this month, Lula shook Xi’s hand, but the moment swiftly **melted into** something more **affectionate**.

Xi had good reason to be feeling warm towards the Brazilian leader. In Lula’s address to the China-CELAC forum, a dialogue between China and Latin American and Caribbean countries, he condemned US tariffs and said the Latin American region wanted to be “the axis of a multipolar order where the Global South is **duly** represented.” Such words echo the case that China has been trying to make to the world – particularly countries in the global south – about the dangers of the tariffs unleashed by US president Donald Trump since he entered the White House in January.

China’s argument stands in contrast to the stance taken by the G7, a group of the world’s wealthiest nations, which on Thursday issued a joint communique in which they agreed to counter global “economic imbalances”, a veiled swipe at China.

Lula’s presence at the forum was itself a **coup** for China as it seeks to expand its global influence in Latin America. Lula was one of three heads of states to attend the conference, along with the presidents of Chile and Colombia. That was no accident. China had specifically courted the leaders of countries seen as being influential in the region and closer to the US, rather than those from the countries more naturally aligned with the Chinese Communist party, such as Venezuela and Cuba, who lack regional clout. Lula in particular got a full **bells-and-whistles** welcome to Beijing, with a military performance in Tiananmen Square including a 21 gun **salute**.

In a keynote speech at the forum, Xi identified China as a fellow member of the global south.

“Independence and autonomy are our glorious tradition. Development and **revitalisation** are our inherent right,” Xi said. China and the Latin American and Caribbean community have a “shared future”, he added.

Since Trump’s first term in office, Brazil has been at the forefront of deepening ties between China and Latin America. One key domain has been trade, which hit a record $157.5bn in 2023. Last year, China imported more than 70% of its soya beans from Brazil, while imports from US farmers have **plummeted**. Luckin Coffee, China’s largest coffee **chain**, has pledged to buy 240,000 tonnes of Brazilian coffee beans over a five year period, worth $1.38bn.

“If it’s up to my government, our relationship with China will be indestructible,” Lula told business leaders in Beijing, as the two countries announced $4.5bn of upcoming Chinese investments in Brazil. In total, Brazil and China signed 20 agreements on agricultural trade, as well as deals on mining, nuclear energy, and currency swaps.

“From a commercial point of view, the current US-China trade war has brought some export opportunities for Brazil, especially in the agricultural sector,” said Victoria Chonn-Ching, a non-resident fellow at the Atlantic Council.

But with a trade policy landscape that can change overnight, Beijing is also trying to win the ideological argument on the global stage. Brazil, which China sees as a fellow leader in the global south, is an important player in that strategy.

“From a geostrategic and diplomatic perspective, the US-China trade war places Brazil in a challenging position,” Chonn-Ching said.

While Brazil has maintained strong ties with the US, on the other hand its relationship with China is significant, said Chonn-Ching, as “both countries promote multilateralism as part of their foreign policy and see themselves as having leading roles in their **respective** regions and in the Global South.”

Unlike many other countries in Latin America, however, Brazil has not signed up to China’s belt and road initiative. Speaking in Beijing, Lula said that Latin America “does not want to be the stage of hegemonic disputes”.

But while Trump’s vision for the global order is still coming into focus, Beijing has for years **trumpeted** the importance of a “multipolar” system of international cooperation. It is a sentiment that Lula echoes.

Recent global events have also brought the two countries closer together. After the 7 October attacks in Israel, Brazil, as president of the UN security council, drafted a resolution condemning Hamas and calling for a humanitarian pause in hostilities as well as the release of hostages in Gaza. Many expected China, which had not until this month specifically condemned the attacks, to veto the resolution. But following rounds of back-room diplomacy with Brazil, China voted in favour. The resolution ultimately failed because of a US veto.

Since then, Brazil and China have come closer together in attempts to cast themselves as mediators in global conflicts. The countries have twice released joint statements on the war in Ukraine, neither of which condemn the Russian invasion. And on his flight back from China, Lula’s plane stopped in Moscow, and he spoke to Xi’s “best friend”, Vladimir Putin, on the phone.

#### [2025-05-24 ‘Alarming’ rise in regional internet censorship in China, study finds](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/24/alarming-rise-in-regional-internet-censorship-in-china-study-finds)

China’s authorities appear to have implemented an enhanced version of the country’s internet censorship **regime** in the central province of Henan, subjecting tens of millions of residents to even stricter controls on access to information than people in the rest of the country.

A research paper published this month by Great Firewall Report, an internet censorship monitoring platform, found that internet users in Henan, one of China’s most populous provinces, were, on average, denied access to five times more websites than a typical Chinese internet user between November 2023 and March 2025.

“Our work documents an alarming sign of regional censorship emerging in China,” said the researchers, who include authors from the University of Massachusetts Amherst and Stanford University.

China has the world’s most sophisticated and extensive internet censorship regime. Internet users cannot access most western news websites or social media platforms, including services provided by Google, Wikipedia and Meta.

Within what has been dubbed the “great firewall”, online content is monitored and censored by a mixture of government authorities and private companies complying with laws that require them to delete any content considered “sensitive”. That includes any information about historical or current events that goes against the Chinese Communist party’s official narrative.

The researchers began looking into the topic after internet users in Henan reported that websites accessible in other parts of China were inaccessible in their province. They found that millions of domains that were not blocked by China’s centralised firewall were at some point inaccessible in Henan.

By buying servers from internet cloud providers, the authors tested the flow of internet traffic from locations within Henan. They tested the internet’s top 1m domains daily between November 2023 and March 2025, with a gap of several months in 2024. The results showed that the Henan firewall blocked nearly 4.2 million domains at some point during the research period, over five times more than the roughly 741,500 domains blocked by China’s national firewall.

The domains that were specifically blocked in Henan were mainly from business-related websites. There have been several finance-related protests in Henan in recent years, which the researchers speculated could be the reason for the additional controls on access to information about the economy being controlled.

In 2022, thousands of people in Henan took part in several demonstrations after they were blocked from withdrawing cash from their bank accounts. The crisis escalated when protesters reported that their mobile health codes, part of the pandemic control measures in place at the time, had turned red, preventing them from travelling or entering buildings. Five officials were later punished for abusing the health code system to **quell** the protests.

Other parts of China have also been subjected to enhanced internet controls. In July 2009, following deadly ethnic **riots**, the Chinese government imposed an internet blackout in Xinjiang, a region in western China home to the Uyghur minority, that lasted 10 months. Since then, the use of the internet in Xinjiang has been much more tightly monitored than in the rest of the country. Online activities in Tibet are also strictly controlled.

The **emergence** of a regional censorship regime in Henan is unusual because it is not a region of China that is normally considered especially **restive** by the Chinese authorities.

The researchers could not determine if the enhanced controls were imposed by the local authorities in Henan or the central government in Beijing.

Rapid advances in China’s artificial intelligence companies are a **boon** to both the censors and those who wish to **evade** them. China’s Ministry of Public Security (MPS) recently unveiled new surveillance tools that can monitor people who use virtual private networks, software that allows people to circumvent the internet firewall. The MPS’s research institute also showcased a tool that it claimed could monitor accounts on Telegram, a messaging app. The tool has already collected more than 30bn messages, the institute claimed.

Mingshi Wu, the lead author of the Henan study, who uses a pseudonym to protect their identity, said: “On the one hand, AI could be leveraged to create more sophisticated, adaptive, and efficient censorship and surveillance tools. On the other hand, AI also enables new opportunities for those seeking to understand and circumvent censorship. For example, AI can assist in developing more **agile** testing tools for detecting censorship.”

The Henan Cyberspace Affairs Commission could not be reached for comment.

#### [2025-05-24 North Korea detains three over warship launch accident, state media reports](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/24/north-korea-detains-three-over-warship-launch-accident-state-media-reports)

North Korea has detained three people over an accident that occurred during the launch of a new warship this past week, state media reported early on Sunday.

Pyongyang has said that “a serious accident occurred” at Wednesday’s launch ceremony in the eastern port city of Chongjin for a newly built 5,000-tonne naval **destroyer**, in which sections of the bottom of the vessel were crushed.

The North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, called the mishap a “criminal act caused by absolute carelessness”.

He said the accident damaged the country’s dignity and vowed to punish those found responsible.

Those detained are Kang Jong Chol, the chief engineer at the Chongjin shipyard; Han Kyong Hak, head of the hull construction workshop; and Kim Yong Hak, deputy manager for administrative affairs, the Korean Central news agency (KCNA) reported.

The KCNA report said the three were “responsible for the accident”.

On Friday, KCNA reported that shipyard manager Hong Kil Ho had been **summoned** by law enforcement.

Kim has ordered the ship to be restored before a ruling party meeting in June. KCNA said the **rehabilitation** plan was **pushing ahead**.

South Korea’s military said US and Seoul intelligence authorities assessed that North Korea’s “side-launch attempt” of the ship failed, and the vessel was left **listing** in the water.

KCNA, however, reported that an “underwater and internal inspection of the warship confirmed that, unlike the initial announcement, there were no holes made at the warship’s bottom”, calling the **extent** of the damage “not serious”.

Satellite imagery shows the warship, covered in blue tarpaulins, lying on its side, with the stern **swung out** into the harbour, but the bow remaining on the side slipway, according to the US-based Center for Strategic and International Studies.

Based on its size and scale, the South Korean military said the newly built warship is believed to be similarly equipped to the 5,000-tonne destroyer-class vessel Choe Hyon, which North Korea launched last month.

Pyongyang has said the Choe Hyon is equipped with the “most powerful weapons”, and that it would “enter into operation early next year”.

Seoul’s military has said the Choe Hyon could have been developed with Russian help, possibly in exchange for Pyongyang deploying thousands of troops to help Moscow fight Ukraine.

Analysts say the warship involved in Wednesday’s accident may have also been constructed with Russian assistance.

#### [2025-05-27 Poorest 75 nations face ‘tidal wave’ of debt repayments to China in 2025, study warns](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/may/27/poorest-750-nations-face-tidal-wave-of-debt-repayments-to-china-in-2025-study-warns)

The most vulnerable nations on Earth are facing a “**tidal** wave” of debt repayments as a Chinese **lending boom** starts to be called in, a new report has warned.

The analysis, published on Tuesday by Australian foreign policy thinktank the Lowy Institute, said that in 2025 the poorest 75 countries were on the hook for record high debt repayments US$22bn to China. The 75 nations’ debt formed the bulk of the total $35bn calculated by Lowy for 2025.

“Now, and for the rest of this decade, China will be more debt collector than banker to the developing world,” the report said.

The pressure to repay was putting strain on local **funding** for health and education as well as climate change **mitigation**.

“China’s lending has collapsed exactly when it is needed most, instead creating large **net financial outflows** when countries are already under intense economic pressure,” it said.

The loans were largely issued under President Xi Jinping’s **signature** belt and road initiative (BRI), a state-backed global infrastructure investment programme which has **underwritten** national projects from schools, bridges and hospitals to **major roads** and shipping and air ports.

The lending **spree** turned China into the largest supplier of bilateral loans, peaking with a total of more than $50bn in 2016 – more than all western creditors combined.

The BRI focused primarily in developing nations, where governments struggled to access private or other state-backed investment. But the practice has raised concerns about Chinese influence and control and drawn accusations that Beijing was seeking to **entrap** recipient nations with **unserviceable** debt. Last month another analysis by the Lowy Institute found that Laos was now trapped in a severe debt crisis, in part because of over-investment in the domestic energy sector, mostly **financed** by China.

China’s government denies accusations it deliberately creates debt traps, and recipient nations have also **pushed back**, saying China was a more reliable partner and offered crucial loans when others refused.

But the Lowy report said the record high debt now due to China could be used for “political leverage”, noting that it comes amid huge cuts to foreign aid by the Trump administration.

The report also highlighted new large-scale loans given to Honduras, Nicaragua, Solomon Islands, Burkina Faso and the Dominican Republic, all within 18 months of those countries switching diplomatic recognition from Taiwan to Beijing.

China also continues to finance some strategic partners, including Pakistan, Kazakhstan, Laos and Mongolia, as well as countries that produce critical minerals and metals, such as Argentina, Brazil and Indonesia.

But the situation also put China in a **bind**, pulled between diplomatic pressure to **restructure** unsustainable debt in vulnerable nations and domestic pressure to **recall** loans amid China’s own economic downturn.

China publishes little data on its BRI scheme, and the Lowy Institute said its estimates – based on World Bank data – likely underestimated the full scale of China’s lending. In 2021 AidData estimated China was owed a “hidden debt” of about $385bn.
