---
layout: post
title:  "25年12月新闻摘选"
date:   2025-12-01 18:39:00 +0800
---

<style type="text/css">
  pre code {
    white-space: pre-wrap;
    word-wrap: break-word;
    overflow-wrap: break-word;
  }
</style>

* 目录
{:toc #markdown-toc}

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/01/asia-flood-sri-lanka-indonesia-deploy-military

Sri Lanka and Indonesia have deployed military personnel as they race to help victims of **devastating** flooding.

Millions of people have been affected by a combination of tropical cyclones and heavy **monsoon** rains in Sri Lanka.

The flooding has submerged homes, **inundated** agricultural fields. Some people **clung** to trees or stood on rooftops.

By Sunday afternoon, rain had **subsided** across Sri Lanka.

Military helicopters have been deployed to **airlift** stranded people and deliver food.

He said solar **lamps** were being distributed.

Extreme rainfall from tropical cyclones has increased **substantially**, as warmer air holds more water **vapour**.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/01/ukraine-war-briefing-trump-says-good-chance-of-deal-to-end-conflict-after-latest-talks-with-kyiv

“Ukraine’s got some difficult little problems,” Trump told reporters aboard Air Force One, referring to a corruption investigation that recently forced President Volodymyr Zelenskyy to **sack** his chief of staff and top negotiator.

“We continue to be **realistic** about how difficult this is, but optimistic.”

A Ukrainian security source said Kyiv was responsible for attacks by **naval** drones on two oil tankers off Turkey’s Black Sea coast that it believed were covertly transporting sanctioned Russian oil. And the Ukrainian government has faced **turbulence**.

“Peace is within reach, if Vladimir Putin abandons his delusional hope of **reconstituting** the Soviet empire by first **subjugating** Ukraine,” he added.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/01/trump-maduro-ultimatum-relinquish-power-venezuela

Donald Trump reportedly gave Nicolás Maduro an ultimatum to **relinquish** power immediately.

Maduro reportedly requested a second call last weekend after Trump declared Venezuela’s airspace “closed in its **entirety**”.

It believed “**deposing** Maduro is in the US national interest”.

Maduro accused the US of seeking to “appropriate Venezuela’s vast oil reserves – through the **lethal** use of military force”.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/02/indonesia-floods-one-million-people-evacuated-death-toll-rises

In Aceh, one of the hardest hit areas, prices have **tripled**.

The World Health Organization said it was strengthening disease **surveillance**.

Survivors have described how powerful **currents** of water arrived rapidly and submerged villages.

“There was no prior warning whatsoever before the water came,” said a student at an Islamic **boarding school**.

This year’s **downpours** were **compounded** by a rare tropical storm formed in the Malacca Strait.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/02/uk-government-delays-china-super-embassy-january

That would be China’s biggest diplomatic **outpost** in the world. A government spokesperson said on Tuesday that **consolidating** China’s seven existing diplomatic sites in London into a single embassy “clearly brings security advantages”.

In a speech on Monday night, he argued that the government could not continue to **blow “hot and cold”** on China and needed to strike a balance.

He described China as a “nation of immense scale, ambition and **ingenuity**” and “a **defining** force in technology, in trade and global governance”.

“Our response will not be driven by fear, nor softened by **illusion**. It will be grounded in strength, clarity and **sober** realism,” Starmer said.

Yvette Cooper said their departments had “carefully considered the **breadth** of considerations” related to the proposed embassy.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/02/witkoff-in-moscow-for-talks-as-putin-claims-to-have-taken-key-ukrainian-city

“We discussed the **essence** of what is embedded in these American documents.”

“The president also did not hide our **critical** and even negative attitude towards a number of proposals.”

He added that the US hoped a compromise would allow them “not just to rebuild their economy, but to **prosper** as a country”.

The relatively **downbeat** assessments of Tuesday night’s diplomacy follows combative opening statements from Putin.

The US delegation was in an intense round of **shuttle** diplomacy that the Trump administration has claimed is its best chance yet of bringing an end to the war.

A short video **feed** from the Kremlin showed the two small delegations sitting on opposite sides of an oval white table.

He has also demanded clear, **enforceable** security guarantees from the west to prevent a future Russian invasion.

Putin’s comments appeared aimed at driving a **wedge** between Washington and European capitals.

**Buoyed** up by recent gains at the front, Putin has indicated in recent weeks that the Russian military was prepared to keep fighting if diplomacy **faltered**.

The Russian president threatened that Moscow would “step up strikes on Ukrainian ports and on any ships entering them” in response to attacks on Russian tankers, which he described as “**piracy**”.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/03/search-for-malaysia-airline-flight-mh370-to-resume-over-11-years-after-plane-went-missing

In a statement on Wednesday, the transport ministry confirmed that the marine **robotics** company Ocean Infinity, based in the UK and US, would resume a search of the seabed from 30 December, over a period of 55 days, with operations conducted **intermittently**.

Flight MH370 **veered** off course and vanished from air traffic radar on 8 March 2014, during a routine flight from Kuala Lumpur to Beijing.

In the years since the disappearance, vast swathes of the Indian Ocean have been **scoured** in an attempt to locate the plane’s wreckage through **multinational** and private efforts, without success.

Last year, Malaysia said it was willing to reopen an investigation into the disappearance if there was **compelling** new evidence.

Flight MH370, a B777-200 aircraft, had departed Kuala Lumpur at 12.41am local time on 8 March 2014, **bound for** Beijing.

Some travelled to Madagascar in 2016 to **comb** the beaches for debris.

Later that year, Australian investigators delivered their final report on the disappearance, saying the inability to **bring closure** for victims’ families was a “great tragedy” and “almost **inconceivable**” in the modern age.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/03/south-korea-martial-law-president-urges-unity

He pledged that “**righteous** unity” would be possible only once accountability was delivered.

However, on a typically **crisp** winter’s afternoon in Seoul that **belied** the significance of the day, that sense of unity appeared as distant as ever.

Several hundred supporters of ousted president Yoon Suk Yeol – the **instigator** of the ill-fated martial law attempt – gathered near the national assembly.

The command aimed to ban political activities, authorise **warrantless** arrests and deploy 280 armed troops to the national assembly.

Thousands of citizens rushed to the parliament building – some helping MPs **scale** its walls to reach the chamber – 190 lawmakers voted unanimously to overturn the decree.

Prosecutors allege Yoon ordered drone flights near Pyongyang in October 2024 in the hope that a retaliatory response could serve as a **pretext** for martial law.

Despite Lee’s calls for unity, the political and social **fractures** exposed during the crisis remain raw.

“Deepening **polarisation** raises serious concerns about the long-term health of Korean democracy.”

In its editorial on Wednesday, the conservative Chosun Ilbo accused the Lee administration of an unprecedented “**rampage** and tyranny” in the way it has governed since taking office.

The liberal Hankyoreh, by contrast, warned that **sluggish** investigations and stalled court proceedings risk enabling insufficient accountability.

“Genuine **reconciliation** and meaningful reforms will be necessary to address the root causes,” she said. “The **trauma** of the martial law episode has left lasting scars.”

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/04/macron-believes-us-may-betray-ukraine-on-territory-says-der-spiegel

Der Spiegel said it had obtained an English summary of Monday’s call, featuring what it said were direct **quotations** from European heads of government in which they expressed fundamental doubts about Washington’s approach to the talks.

The magazine said other leaders also voiced their concerns, with Finland’s Alexander Stubb, who has **bonded with** Trump over golf.

Even the Nato secretary general, Mark Rutte – who in public is very **complimentary** of Trump – reportedly said he agreed with Stubb “that we need to protect Volodymyr”.

Two of them reportedly said the remarks were “accurately **reproduced**”.

In a **guest column** for the daily Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, Merz argued for the use of frozen Russian state assets to support Ukraine.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/04/thailand-scam-cyberscam-crackdown-arrests-south-east-asia

Law enforcement agencies have yet to arrest the suspected **masterminds** of the **lucrative** networks.

In October, the US justice department indicted Chen for **wire fraud** conspiracy and money-laundering conspiracy for allegedly directing Prince Group’s operation of forced-labour scam compounds across Cambodia.

Another alleged scam operation involved Yim Leak, who Thai authorities described as “the heir of an influential network in Cambodia” that conducted **fraudulent** transactions.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/04/ukraine-war-briefing-stop-wasting-worlds-time-putin-told

The UK foreign secretary, Yvette Cooper, said the Russian president “should end the **bluster** and the bloodshed” and sit down to negotiate peace.

His latest remarks may **prick** the ears of Donald Trump, who, after once **haranguing** Volodymyr Zelenskyy in the Oval Office, drastically changed his tune, at least for a time, after Charles **indulged** the US president with a state visit and impressed upon him the broader importance of Ukraine’s defence.

Trump on Wednesday continued to loosely **preside over** attempts to strike a peace deal. Trump said Putin would like to make a deal but “what comes out of that meeting I can’t tell you because it does take two to **tango**”.

Ukraine’s military general staff announced recent strikes on Russian targets including a Black Sea observation post on an **oil rig**.

However a sanctions “**loophole**” has allowed Russian oil products refined elsewhere to find their way to Australia.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/07/kremlin-hails-trump-national-security-strategy-as-aligned-with-russia-vision

The Kremlin has **heaped** praise on Donald Trump’s latest national security strategy.

A White House document criticises the EU and says Europe is at risk of “civilisational **erasure**”.

“The adjustments that we see correspond in many ways to our **vision**,” the Kremlin spokesperson, Dmitry Peskov, said on Sunday.

A key issue for Kyiv is what security guarantees it would receive if it does agree to **renounce** control of some territory.

“Ukraine is determined to keep working **in good faith** with the American side to genuinely achieve peace,” Zelenskyy wrote on social media.

Trump’s **outgoing** Ukraine envoy, Keith Kellogg, said at a defence forum on Saturday that the administration’s efforts to end the war were in “the last 10 metres”.

He said the US would not be “the idiot with the **chequebook**” any longer.

They say a difficult and potentially **bleak** winter lies ahead as Russia continues to target energy infrastructure.

It was the second **consecutive** night of attacks targeting energy.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/07/first-phase-trump-israel-gaza-ceasefire-plan-netanyahu

Benjamin Netanyahu has said that the first phase of the UN-**endorsed** Gaza ceasefire plan is close to completion.

The Israeli prime minister said he would discuss the next steps later this month in Washington with Donald Trump, whose Gaza proposals were **codified** in a UN security council resolution on 17 November.

Netanyahu dismisses the warrants as “**trumped**-up charges” from a “corrupt prosecutor”.

“I think it’s important to make sure that Hamas complies not only with the ceasefire, but also with their commitment which they **undertook** to disarm and have Gaza demilitarise,” he said.

He stressed that Israel was **adamantly** opposed to the creation of a Palestinian state.

Netanyahu said the reason he would not be able make a return visit to Germany was the ICC arrest warrants, which he described as **fabricated** by the court’s chief prosecutor, Karim Khan, as a means of diverting attention from allegations of sexual harassment against him.

Another **tribunal**, the international court of justice, is weighing up charges that Israeli has committed genocide in Gaza.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/08/japan-tsunami-warning-after-earthquake-tremor

Glasses and bowls fell and **smashed** into **shards** on the floor.

On Japan’s one-to-seven scale of seismic intensity, the **tremor** registered as an “upper six” in Aomori prefecture – a quake strong enough to make it impossible to keep standing or move without **crawling**. In such tremors, most heavy furniture can collapse and wall tiles and **windowpanes** are damaged in many buildings.

No **irregularities** were reported at nuclear power plants in the region.

Located in the “ring of fire” arc of volcanoes and oceanic **trenches** partly **encircling** the Pacific **Basin**, Japan accounts for about 20% of the world’s earthquakes of magnitude 6.0 or greater.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/08/thailand-airstrikes-disputed-border-cambodia

Gen Chaiyapruek Duangprapat, the Thai army’s chief of staff, said it was seeking to **cripple** Cambodia’s military capability, with the aim of **neutralising** it as a threat in the long term.

“However, Thailand will not tolerate violations of its sovereignty and will proceed **rationally** and with **due regard** for the principles of peace, security and humanity,” he said.

The Malaysian prime minister warned that the fighting risked “**unravelling** the careful work that has gone into stabilising relations between the two neighbours”.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/08/japan-china-radar-fighter-jets-claims

China’s government has **roundly** rejected Japan’s accusations, instead lodging its own **counterprotests**.

A fire-control radar lock signals a potential attack, forcing the targeted aircraft to take **evasive** action.

The Japanese defence minister said on Sunday the incident was “dangerous and extremely **regrettable**”.

“These radar **illuminations** went beyond what is necessary for the safe flight of aircraft,” he said.

China has disputed Japan’s claims as “completely inconsistent with the facts”, instead accusing Japan’s self-defence forces of having “**maliciously** followed and harassed” its Liaoning aircraft carrier group while it was conducting training drills.

The Japan side was “repeatedly sending aircraft to intrude into the exercise and training zones that China had **demarcated** and announced in advance,” said senior Col Zhang Xiaogang.

Chinese state media has also revived a campaign questioning Japan’s territorial claims over the **Ryuku** Island chain, which includes Okinawa.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/09/chinas-record-high-trade-surplus-reveals-the-difficulty-trump-will-have-in-rebalancing-global-economy

The record trade surplus comes even as exports to the US have plummeted, a reflection of the **bruising** US-China trade war that, despite a recent cooling, has **dampened** the flow of goods between the world’s two largest economies.

Chinese premier Li Qiang said the “mutually destructive consequences of tariffs have become increasingly **evident**”.

That is because the demand in the US for cheap products has not gone away, and few countries can replicate China’s **mammoth** ability to produce consumer goods at scale at low prices.

Chinese households are keen on saving money, a trend exacerbated by the pandemic and real estate crash in China that **wiped out** many people’s savings.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/09/fatal-thailand-cambodia-clashes-spread-along-contested-border-area

“Cambodia needs peace but Cambodia is compelled to counterattack to defend our territory,” he said in a Facebook post, saying his country had strong **bunkers** and weapons that would give it an advantage.

Cambodia said “renewed aggression” by Thailand had “destroyed infrastructure, damaged temples, **cultural property**, human heritage and disrupted essential public services”.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/24/why-thailand-cambodia-border-clash-conflict

The latest fighting began with **skirmishes** on Sunday night.

An enhanced ceasefire agreement was officially signed six weeks ago in Trump’s **presence**.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/09/zelenskyy-ready-for-elections-after-trump-questions-ukrainian-democracy

Volodymyr Zelenskyy has said he is ready to hold a wartime election within the next three months, after Donald Trump accused him of **clinging on** to power.

Zelenskyy, clearly **irritated** by Trump’s intervention, said that “this is a question for the people of Ukraine, with all due respect to our partners”.

“**Moreover**, I am asking … the United States to help me, possibly together with European colleagues, to ensure security for the elections,” he added.

Trump made the comments in a **rambling** interview with **Politico** published earlier on Tuesday.

Trump’s son Donald Jr said that Zelenskyy was **prolonging** the war because he was worried he would otherwise lose power.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/10/trump-says-end-hostilities-thailand-cambodia

Speaking at a rally in Pennsylvania, the US president reiterated his global peacemaking skills, **proclaiming** that “in ten months I ended eight wars”.

Tensions have **simmered** since Thailand suspended de-escalation measures in November after a Thai soldier was maimed by a landmine.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/10/japan-megaquake-advisory-north-tsunami-fears

Japan has issued a **megaquake** **advisory** after a magnitude 7.5 earthquake struck off the eastern coast of Aomori.

Damage from the quake was modest – 34 mostly **mild** injuries and some damage to roads and buildings.

In explaining the advisory, the JMA said the magnitude 9.0 quake in 2011 occurred two days after a magnitude 7.3 **temblor**.

The areas covered by the advisory extend across 182 **municipalities** from Hokkaido to Chiba prefecture.

Japan’s megaquake advisory last year contained a lot of scientific **jargon**, worrying and **baffling** many across the country.

Many people postponed planned trips and rushed to stock up on rice, dried noodles, bottled water and **portable** toilets.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/11/us-wants-ukraine-to-withdraw-from-donbas-and-create-free-economic-zone-says-zelenskyy

There would need to be elections or a referendum to **ratify** it, saying that only “the Ukrainian people” could make decisions on **territorial concessions**.

In Berlin, the Nato secretary general, Mark Rutte, warned that the continent had been “quietly **complacent**” over the threat from Russia.

The US president appears to get **ever more** impatient with the lack of a peace deal.

Also on Thursday, top EU officials met in Lviv, in western Ukraine, to discuss Ukraine’s **accession** prospects, **even as** Hungary’s Russia-friendly leader, Viktor Orbán, continues to block formal negotiations.

“We all understand that the US president has various **levers** of influence, and these will work on those who are currently blocking Ukraine,” he said.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/12/thailand-set-for-early-elections-cambodia-clashes

He is Thailand’s third prime minister since August 2023, and political instability is **taking a toll** on south-east Asia’s second-largest economy.

The party put forward a number of demands, including a referendum on constitutional **amendments**, as part of a deal to support him.

“When the People’s party couldn’t get what they want, they said they will submit a **no-confidence** motion and asked the PM to dissolve parliament immediately,” Siripong said.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/12/thailand-and-cambodia-agree-to-restart-ceasefire-brokered-by-us-says-trump

Cambodia announced it had suspended all **border crossings** with Thailand.

Thai forces carried out strikes, including with fighter jets, while Cambodia fired rocket **barrages** along the border area on Saturday.

Trump’s ceasefire announcement on Friday was met with a **tepid** reaction by leaders from both countries.

“We **regret** and we’re disappointed that some of the points made by President Trump have **bearing upon** the **feeling** of the Thai people,,” he said.

Despite the deal, the two countries carried on a **bitter** propaganda war and minor cross-border violence continued.

The roots of the Thai-Cambodian border conflict lie in a history of **enmity** over competing territorial claims. These claims largely stem from a 1907 map created while Cambodia was under French colonial rule, which Thailand **maintains** is inaccurate.

The rockets are **imprecise** have a wide area of impact, with most landing in areas that have already been evacuated.

At least six of the Thai soldiers killed were hit by rocket **shrapnel**.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/13/north-korea-troops-cleared-landmines-russia-kim-jong-un

Nine members of the **regiment** died during the 120-day deployment that started in August.

He awarded the deceased state honours to “add **eternal** **lustre**” to their bravery.

Other images showed Kim **consoling** families of the deceased and kneeling before a portrait of a fallen soldier to pay his respects.

At a previous ceremony in August, images released by KCNA showed an emotional Kim embracing a returned solider who appeared **overwhelmed**, burying his face in the leader’s chest.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/14/hong-kong-opposition-democratic-party-disbands-chinese-pressure

Hong Kong’s last major opposition party has disbanded after a vote by its members, the **culmination** of Chinese pressure on the city’s remaining liberal voices in a years-long security crackdown.

However, mass pro-democracy protests in 2019 against a perceived tightening of China’s grip on the city prompted Beijing to enact a sweeping national security law to **stifle** dissent.

On Sunday, DP members voted to disband the party and to enter **liquidation**,.

Of 121 votes cast, 117 were in favour of disbanding while four were **abstentions**.

Senior party members previously told Reuters they had been **approached** by Chinese officials or “middlemen” and told to disband or face severe consequences, including possible arrest.

There was no immediate response to a request for comment from the Hong Kong **Liaison** Office, China’s main representative body in the special administrative region.

“I find it very **problematic**,” she said.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/15/ukraine-talks-european-leaders-meet-berlin-starmer-macron-zelenskyy-merz-us-witkoff

Under the proposal, Ukraine would have western support to maintain a **standing** army of 800,000 troops.

The deal would effectively provide “**article** five-like” guarantees to Ukraine.

They confirmed the US would not **put boots on the ground** in Ukraine as part of the deal.

Zelenskyy described the talks with the US side as “not easy” but said they had made **headway**.

The search for **viable** terms for an end to the war has run into major **obstacles**.

He also said he hoped Washington would accept freezing the frontline where it was, rather than Ukraine ceding the entire Donbas region, which **comprises** Donetsk and Luhansk oblasts.

The EU, meanwhile, is **scrambling** this week to agree a plan on financing Ukraine in the coming years by using frozen Russian assets. A leaders’ meeting is scheduled to begin on Thursday and a deal still appears **elusive**.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/15/china-uyghur-human-rights-ice

Guan “would likely be **persecuted**” if he returned to China.

“He should be given every opportunity to stay in a place of **refuge**,” the statement added.

China **vehemently** denies these allegations.

She **recalls** receiving a text in August from a friend of Guan’s.

Guan’s supporters say he is being held in a Broome County facility in **upstate** New York.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/16/pentagon-wont-release-full-video-caribbean-attack

Trump at one point supported making the footage public but later backtracked and **deferred to** Hegseth.

As he left a **classified** briefing conducted for senators alongside Marco Rubio, the Pentagon chief said he would not release it in its entirety.

“How can you trust their transparency on all the other issues **swirling** about in the Caribbean?”

“It is hard to **square** the widespread **routine** prompt posting of detailed videos of every stripe with a concern that posting a portion of the video of the first strike would violate a variety of classification concerns.”

“I have asked, and will continue to ask, to see that – why, as a member of Congress and the **ranking** member in the foreign affairs committee, I’m not allowed to see it.”

Lawmakers have introduced **war powers** **resolutions** intended to stop the president from engaging in hostilities against Venezuela without Congress’s permission.

Several Trump allies who emerged from Hegseth’s briefing with senators said they had no **reservations** about his actions against Venezuela or targeting of boats.

“Keep in mind, we have an obligation to send a team to **interdict**,” he said.

“Interdicting a vessel underway, is perhaps the most dangerous mission we have in our entire military **inventory**.”

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/18/china-to-raise-tax-condoms-boost-birth-rate

From 1 January, condoms and **contraceptives** will be subject to a 13% VAT rate.

The measure was **buried** in a VAT law passed in 2024 in an effort to modernise China’s tax regime.

China has over the past decade been introducing a **suite** of “carrots” to **induce** people to have more children.

Provinces have been experimenting with offering discounts on **IVF** treatment. Some local governments offer **newlyweds** extra days of paid leave to encourage people to **tie the knot**.

“What is wrong with modern society? They are truly **going to extreme lengths** just to make us have children,” wrote one user on Weibo.

The new VAT law also includes a **tax break** for childcare and “marriage introduction services”.

Women in some areas have reported receiving phone calls from local government officers asking about their **menstrual** cycles and childbearing plans. The local health bureau said the data collection was necessary to identify pregnant and **expectant** mothers.

“They’ll be calling to urge **intercourse** during the **ovulation** period … this is mass **breeding**.”

It **signified** from the government “what desirable family behaviour should be”.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/17/this-is-europe-young-people-dysfunctional-housing-system-renting

The rent average **masks** dramatic spikes experienced in some countries. If property has been a lucrative **bet** for wealthy investors, the cost of a home is a financial **ordeal** for millions of people whose incomes have been **outpaced**.

New research reported extraordinary levels of housing **precarity**:

A range of factors is driving the **affordability** crisis. But the biggest structural issue, say experts, is “**financialisation**”. In a shift dating back to the 1980s, many European governments have **disengaged** from direct social housing provision. Home ownership has slumped, even in countries where it used to be an **ingrained** part of the culture.

The resulting crisis is not just a downer for young people still sharing a kitchen with their “full **nester**” parents – it is an **economic drag**.

Essential workers are being **priced out**.

Housing **inequality** is, in some countries, feeding the success of far-right parties that **peddle** a narrative of **zero-sum** competition between migrants and locals for scarce resources. In that sense, housing has become Europe’s political **timebomb**, say experts.

On Tuesday, the European Commission unveiled its first-ever affordable housing strategy, which gives governments more **leeway** to subsidise affordable housing.

They are under mounting pressure to extend **eligibility** beyond just the poorest groups. The fact that the EU is stepping in shows at least an awareness of what is at **stake**.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/18/us-announces-more-than-10bn-of-arms-sales-to-taiwan

Donald Trump made **scant** mention of foreign policy issues. US-Chinese tensions have **ebbed** and flowed during Trump’s second term.

The eight arms sales agreements announced on Wednesday cover 82 **high-mobility** artillery rocket systems. They also include 60 self-propelled **howitzer** systems.

Other sales in the package include helicopter spare parts worth $96m and **refurbishment** kits.

In separate but nearly **identical** statements, the state department said the sales serve “US national, economic and security interests.”

“The ‘Taiwan independence’ forces on the island seek independence through force, **squandering** the **hard-earned** money of the people to purchase weapons at the cost of turning Taiwan into a **powder keg**,” said foreign ministry spokesperson Guo Jiakun.

“This cannot save the **doomed fate** of ‘Taiwan independence’. The US support for ‘Taiwan Independence’ through arms will only end up **backfiring**. Using Taiwan to **contain** China will not succeed,” he added.

But the push towards greater weapons sales has been **impeded** by Trump’s **erratic** stance on Taiwan.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/19/workers-rural-protests-china-land-grabs

Standing inside the temple armed with buckets of rice, the sound of shouting **audible** over banging drums.

A **scuffle** breaks out, some villagers throw handfuls of rice at the officers, a traditional custom for **dispelling** evil, while others **hoist** religious **artefacts** onto their shoulders and march away, past groups of police and other officials.

The **showdown** happened last month. One commenter wrote: “Oh, even their spiritual **solace** is gone.”

“They are frustrated by the lack of economic opportunity and are more prone to volatile **outbursts**,” Chen says.

Two women are **kowtowing**, a traditional gesture performed by those seeking justice.

Tongxing village is a mountainous community, known for its crops of **bayberries**, a small, **prickly**, red fruit.

Several videos collected by China Dissent Monitor appear to **corroborate** the reports. A report published by Chinese media earlier in the summer detailed an ongoing dispute between villagers and a **limestone** mining company to repurpose their land for a **quarry**. Several villagers signed a **petition** opposing the quarry.

However, the state has the power to **requisition** farmland for commercial development.

After several days of intense clashes, a video emerged of villagers appearing to **overpower** local officials, forcing them to kneel.

There is no evidence that the protests are the result of social **contagion** between different places.

But the rapid increase in protests comes at a time of nationwide **malaise** about the sluggish economy, which may fuel **discontent** across different locations.

Firstly, struggling local governments, which collectively are estimated to be **saddled** with at least 44tn yuan ($6.2tn) of debt, need money for public services and to pay salaries. Even though the property sector has plummeted the seized land can still be used as **collateral** to get new loans.

“Land seizures continue to be a major issue because the country is rapidly **urbanising**,” says Rachel Murphy. “Meanwhile, local government **coffers** continue to rely in large part on converting land use from agricultural to non-farm uses”.

While there is no official data on this trend, **anecdotes** **abound**.

The failure of those people to return to work reflects “the **deep-seated** contradictions in the current employment situation of migrant workers”, wrote researchers from Hunan Normal University.

Some in China talk of the “three no’s” to describe the situation of rural migrant workers: no jobs to find, no land to **cultivate**, no place to go”.

Evidence is generally **scrubbed** from social media.

This year, the government has started **rolling out** new service centres in rural areas staffed with social workers, legal advisers and even psychological **counsellors** to mediate disputes before they escalate.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/26/china-imposes-sanctions-on-us-defence-firms-over-taiwan-arms-deal

China’s stance on Taiwan has been a **pinch point** in its relations with the US, already **worn thin** over trade and tariff issues.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/27/thailand-and-cambodia-agree-immediate-ceasefire-after-weeks-of-deadly-border-clashes

Even as the two countries held talks on Saturday to put an end to the **skirmish**, Cambodia reported that Thailand hit a site in the country’s north-west with an airstrike.

Despite a **shaky** ceasefire mediated by the Malaysian prime minister, Anwar Ibrahim, and backed up by pressure from the US president, Donald Trump, renewed combat erupted in early December.

Thailand has also reported 44 civilian deaths from **collateral effects** of the situation.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/dec/28/myanmar-is-going-to-the-polls-but-its-not-the-people-who-hold-the-power-its-china

Myanmar’s military has managed to regain momentum in its battle against a determined **patchwork** of opposition groups, retaking some territory, and pushing ahead with a widely condemned election that begins on Sunday.

It is a **turnaround** for the military, which had appeared so **beleaguered** that some dared to question if it could collapse.

“This is really all China playing a role in **tilting** things in favour of the military regime,” says Jason Tower.

It was anger over the proliferation in scam compounds in border areas that led China to give its **tacit** approval to northern-based ethnic armed groups to launch an offensive against the junta in late 2023.

Earlier this year the Chinese foreign minister, Wang Yi, expressed hope the vote would achieve “domestic peace with a **cessation** of hostilities among parties and national governance based on the will of the people”.

The Union Solidarity and Development party is providing more than a fifth of candidates and running in effect **uncontested** in some areas.

Anti-China sentiment has risen in Myanmar, including a perception that China is **stoking** conflict to increase its own leverage over the country.

“I think what the Chinese will say is that they see the situation as a **dynamism**, that a balance of power will eventually lead to some stability,” she said.

