---
layout: post
title:  "25年4月新闻摘选"
date:   2025-04-01 20:26:00 +0800
---

* 目录
{:toc #markdown-toc}

#### [2024-04-01 China launches surprise military drills around Taiwan | Taiwan | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/apr/01/china-launches-surprise-military-drills-around-taiwan)

“China’s wide-ranging drills indicate that its ambitions are not limited to annexing Taiwan, but rather aim to achieve **hegemony** in the western Pacific.”

```
The military hegemony of the U.S. is expected to decline in the foreseeable future
```

Other imagery called Taiwan’s president, Lai Ching-te, a “parasite **courting** ultimate destruction” and portrayed him as a cartoon bug being held by chopsticks over a burning Taipei. That cartoon, which was in Chinese and English, also showed him holding a former opposition figure, Ko Wen-je, in a cage, in apparent provocation of Taiwan’s **febrile** domestic politics – Ko is now in jail on corruption charges but some supporters have called it a political **persecution**.

```
Courting life improvement is a major motivation for her to study hard.
```

```
The imposition of martial law led to a febrile political situation.
```

```
He died as a result of persecution by his political rivals.
```

China has launched numerous drills against Taiwan in recent years, often in response to **perceived** acts of separatism or pro-independence.

```
I perceived his enthusiasm for writing.
```

Last month he declared China to be a “foreign hostile force” under national security legislation, and announced a series of measures to **counter** its growing influence and espionage operations.

```
We need to find a way to counter the repercussions caused by his behavior.
```

Amanda Hsiao, a director in Eurasia Group’s China **practice**, said Tuesday’s propaganda “makes it clear that China is breaking from what has been a relatively quiet approach since Trump’s election”.

```
Following China's rapid development, many foreign enterprises are coming here to expand their operations.
```

The publicity around the exercise likely also **has** the US **in mind** – they want to persuade the Trump administration that Lai is a troublemaker and to deter the US from maintaining high levels of support to Taiwan.”

```
We'd better have potential changes in requirements in mind.
```

Tuesday’s drills have **differed** slightly from more recent efforts, which have not been so explicitly linked to “punishing” Taiwan. They were also launched with little warning. Taiwan’s government and military have been ramping up their response training amid growing concern that Beijing might launch a real attack or blockade under the **guise** of a drill.

```
His thoughts obviously differ from ours.
```

```
Under the guise of helping, he actually took control.
```

On Tuesday, defence ministry spokesperson Sun Li-fang said Taiwan had **elevated** its readiness level to ensure China didn’t “turn drills in to combat” and “launch a sudden attack on us”.

```
As the rain became heavier and heavier, the government decided to elevate the emergency response level
```

#### [2025-04-02 China military drills targeting Taiwan put region’s security at risk, says US | Taiwan | The Guardian](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/apr/02/us-says-china-military-drills-targeting-taiwan-put-regions-security-at-risk)

The US has accused China of putting the region’s security at risk after it launched a second day of military drills targeting Taiwan with a **rehearsal** blockade and attack.

```
Their wonderful performance on stage is based on sufficient rehearsals.
```

In contrast to Tuesday’s drills, the PLA said it would use **live fire** on Wednesday but Taiwan’s defence ministry said it did not detect any near its territory.

```
The commander has announced they will use live fire in the drills next month.
```

“The exercises focus on subjects of identification and verification, warning and **expulsion**, and interception and **detention** so as to test the troops’ capabilities of area regulation and control, joint blockade and control, and precision strikes on key targets,” it said in a statement.

```
The headteacher threatened the three girls with expulsion.
```

```
Driving after consuming alcoholic drinks will result in detention as a punishment.
```

On Wednesday the US state department said it remained **committed** to Taiwan and other allies and partners “in the face of China’s **intimidation** tactics and destabilising behaviour”.

```
They are committed socialists.
```

```
Intimidations have no effect on Chinese people.
```

“Once again, China’s aggressive military activities and rhetoric toward Taiwan only serve to **exacerbate** tensions and put the region’s security and the world’s prosperity at risk,” it said. “The United States supports peace and stability across the Taiwan strait and opposes unilateral changes to the **status quo**, including through force or coercion.”

```
The president's announcement exacerbated relations with Russia
```

```
We hope that the status quo will not be disrupted.
```

“The EU has a direct interest in the **preservation** of the status quo in the Taiwan strait. We oppose any unilateral actions that change the status quo by force or **coercion**,” an EU spokesperson said.

```
The preservation of one's quality of life is at significant risk if faced with unemployment.
```

```
Coercion is not helpful in establishing relations between countries.
```

Analysts believe the PLA is not yet capable of the required full-scale invasion, but in the meantime it **routinely** launches grey zone tactics, military drills, economic, legal and cyberwarfare, and disinformation campaigns.

```
They held the celebration routinely.
```

Maj Gen Meng Xiangqing, professor at the PLA National Defence University, told the state broadcaster CCTV: “**As long as** Taiwan independence separatists dare to cross the line, the PLA will definitely act.”

```
As long as you remember this chapter, you will achieve a high score in the examination.
```

The drills have been accompanied by widely **distributed** propaganda materials, including videos depicting an attack on Taiwan, and a cartoon depicting Lai as a bug being held by chopsticks over a burning Taipei. A propaganda poster on Tuesday was titled “closing in”. On Wednesday a second one was released titled “**paralysis**”.

```
The deployment of this program is distributed.
```

```
The recent political turmoil has plunged the country into a state of nationwide economic paralysis.
```

In the face of growing CCP aggression, Lai has been more assertive in his approach to cross-strait tensions than his **predecessor**.

```
You have performed much better than your predecessor.
```

#### [2025-04-04 China hits back hard at ‘bullying’ Trump tariffs as global recession fears grow](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/apr/04/china-donald-trump-tariffs-recession--us-stock-market)

China has hit back hard against Donald Trump’s “bullying” tariffs, raising fears that the escalating trade war could trigger a global **recession** and prompting fresh turmoil in financial markets.

```
The whole world is worried about a potential global recession that may be caused by the tariff wars initiated by Trump.
```

The tariffs “clearly represent a significant risk to the global **outlook** at a time of **sluggish** growth,” said the IMF managing director, Kristalina Georgieva.

```
The outlook for the EV industry is very promising.
```

```
After the pandemic occurred in 2020, global economic growth became sluggish.
```

The UK chancellor, Rachel Reeves, said ministers would continue to negotiate with Washington, in the hope that the 10% levy on UK exports could be **lifted**.

```
Trump has promised that he would lift the tariffs on countries which did not retaliate.
```

“I would have thought the central expectation now must be that if she is **sticking to** her fiscal rules, she’ll need to increase taxes in the autumn by possibly some significant amount,” said Paul Johnson, the director of the Institute for Fiscal Studies.
On Wall Street, the tech-focused Nasdaq index entered bear market territory – meaning it has lost more than 20% of its value since the **sell-off** began. It was down 5.8% on Friday alone. The S&P 500 fell 9.1%, its worst five-day trading **stretch since** March 2020.

```
He is still sticking to the decision to give up the opportunity.
```

```
The sell-off has caused the stock market to fall sharply.
```

```
He achieved the best score stretch since the contest's first holding.
```

There was little sign of such **moderation** in China’s **trenchant** response to the Trump tariffs, however.

```
Our response should be moderate.
```

```
The trenchant coverage made him extremely angry.
```

The president has promised voters his “liberation day” policies will bring jobs and investment **pouring back** into the US. But investors fear the higher prices that are likely to result will depress consumer demand in the US, and put the brakes on export-dependent economies worldwide.

```
Please help me pour back the liquid into this bucket.
```

The market **meltdown** has also been fuelled by Trump’s unpredictability, which makes it impossible to forecast whether he will negotiate away some of the tariffs in exchange for **concessions** – or double down.

```
The possibility of a financial meltdown increased significantly due to the tariff wars.
```

```
Unconditional concessions will only lead to further humiliations.
```

“Markets are crashing because markets are based on the stock value of companies who today are **embedded** in modes of production that are bad for the US,” he claimed.

```
This picture needs to be embedded into the wall.
```

Still, in the UK, some economists suggested the tariffs may have only a **modest** impact. James Smith, an economist at the analysts ING, said: “The **overall** hit from tariffs on Britain’s GDP is perhaps only 0.2% or so. Certainly not enough to decisively change the outlook for UK growth. And remember there are some **decent** **tailwinds** for growth this year, notably from government spending.”

```
The growth rate, as expected, is modest.
```

```
The overall profits are quite remarkable.
```

```
He doesn't even have decent clothes.
```

```
Riding in a tailwind is relatively easier.
```

#### [2025-04-05 Trump tariffs come into effect in ‘seismic’ shift to global trade](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/apr/05/trump-tariffs-come-into-effect-in-seismic-shift-to-global-trade)

US **customs** agents began collecting the unilateral tariff at US seaports, airports and customs **warehouses** at 12.01am ET (04:01 GMT), with higher levies on goods from 57 larger trading partners due to start next week – including from the EU, which will be hit with a 20% rate.

Starmer was “clear the UK’s response will be guided by the national interest” and officials would “calmly continue with our **preparatory** work, rather than rush to retaliate”, a No 10 spokesperson said.

Up until now, UK ministers have avoided voicing any criticism of Trump as they sought to secure a trade agreement with the US – hoping for some **exemption** from the tariffs. However, the UK government has drawn up a list of products that could be hit in retaliation, and was consulting with **businesses** on how any countermeasures could affect them.

He said: “The action taken by the US government is completely **illogical**. It will damage the United States itself. It will raise costs in the United States. It will **eliminate** jobs in the United States, it will reduce growth in the United States and we have to make it **abundantly** clear not just that that is going to happen **rhetorically**, but the US has to feel the pain, because ultimately it will be Americans who will persuade their government to stop this foolishness.”

Trump’s announcement of the tariffs on Wednesday shook global stock markets to their core, **wiping out** $5tn in stock market value for S&P 500 companies by Friday’s close, a record two-day decline. The prices of oil and **commodities** plunged, as investors fled to the safety of government **bonds**.

While speaking at a Brookings Institution event on Thursday, Shaw said she expected that over time the tariffs would **evolve** as countries started negotiating lower rates for themselves, but she called the change “huge”.

Shaw said: “This is a pretty **seismic** and significant shift in the way that we trade with every country on Earth.”

#### [2025-04-08 Trump confirms 104% tariffs on Chinese goods as part of unfolding global trade war](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/apr/08/trump-global-tariffs)

Donald Trump is poised to **unleash** his trade war with the world on Wednesday, **pressing ahead** with a **slew** of tariffs on the US’s largest trading partners despite fears of widespread economic damage and calls to reconsider.

However, Beijing vowed to “fight to the end” after Trump threatened to hit Chinese exports with additional 50% tariffs if the country **proceeds with plans** to retaliate against his initial **vow** to impose tariffs of 34% on its products.

“President Trump has a **spine** of steel and he will not break,” the **press secretary**, Karoline Leavitt, said.

The New Civil Liberties Alliance is a **libertarian** group.

The latest tariffs are higher than the 10% **flat rate** imposed on all global imports to the US on Friday last week and are **tailored** to specific countries based on a formula that has been criticised by economists that divides trade in goods deficit by twice the total value of imports.

Earlier in the day, the FTSE 100 rallied by 2.7% in London, recovering some of the losses it has endured since Trump’s announcement – on what was **dubbed** “liberation day” by his aides – last week. The Nikkei 225 **rallied** 6% in Tokyo. The Hang Seng Index rose 1.5% in Hong Kong.

If they come to the table with **solid** proposals, I think we can end up with some good deals.”

But he again raised the prospect of agreements with countries on Tuesday, **trailing** a potential deal with South Korea.

The president added: “‘**ONE STOP SHOPPING**’ is a beautiful and efficient process!!! China also wants to make a deal, badly, but they don’t know how to get it started. We are waiting for their call. It will happen!”

Rachel Reeves, the UK chancellor, sought to ease concerns about market **volatility**, telling parliament she had spoken to Andrew Bailey, the governor of the Bank of England, who confirmed “markets are functioning effectively and that our banking system is **resilient**”.

“What we don’t want to see is a trade war, with Britain becoming **inward-looking**.”

China adopted an **altogether** different stance. In a **scathing** editorial, the official state news outlet Xinhua accused the US president of “**naked** **extortion**”.

“**Utterly** **absurd** is the underlying logic of the United States: ‘I can hit you at my will, and you must not respond. Instead, you must surrender unconditionally,’” it said. “This is not diplomacy. It is **blunt** coercion dressed up as policy.”

#### [2025-04-22 Rice crisis: Japan imports grain from South Korea for first time in more than 25 years](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/apr/22/japan-south-korea-rice-import-crisis)

The quantity of South Korean rice, which was sold online and at supermarkets, is still relatively low at just two **tonnes**, but there are plans to ship a further 20 tonnes in the coming days, the public broadcaster NHK said.

Hirano told Reuters that the price of the Californian product he now served had doubled since his first purchase last summer, but was still cheaper than **homegrown** rice.

And he has had no **complaints** from diners, including Miki Nihei, who was surprised to find out the rice she had eaten wasn’t grown in Japan. “I had no idea,” she said. “I have no **qualms** about eating imported rice. Prices have gone up, so I’m always looking for cheaper options.”

The trend has forced the Japanese government to take the unusual step of **dipping** into its vast rice **reserves**. In March it began releasing 210,000 tonnes of stockpiled rice in an attempt to **arrest** price rises caused by a combination of record summer heat, panic buying and distribution problems.

Japan had previously dipped into its rice reserves in the aftermath of natural disasters or crop failures, but this was the first time it had **intervened** over **distribution** issues.

Japan’s rice stockpiles had already **depleted** after record-breaking temperatures affected the 2023 crop.

#### [2025-04-23 Taiwan president will not attend Pope Francis’s funeral](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/apr/23/taiwan-president-will-not-attend-pope-francis-funeral)

Taiwan’s president, Lai Ching-te, will not attend the funeral of **Pope** Francis, despite his foreign ministry saying earlier it was their “most important **aim**” in negotiations with the Vatican that he be there in person.

The ministry announced on Wednesday that Taiwan would be sending its former vice-president, Chen Chien-jen as special envoy. Chen has deep ties with the Vatican and met Pope Francis six times, but the decision means Taiwan’s delegation will be without a **serving** government official, despite the Vatican being one of Taiwan’s few diplomatic allies.

Just 12 governments, including the Vatican, recognise Taiwan as a country, and China **lobbies** to keep it excluded from most multilateral **bodies**. As a result there are few opportunities for Taiwan’s president to **mix with** other foreign leaders.

Taiwan’s deputy foreign minister, Wu Chih-chung, had earlier said the government was in talks with the Vatican over Lai’s **attendance**.

“This is the foreign ministry’s most important aim,” Wu said on Wednesday. Wu said the Vatican had “considerations” about whom Taiwan would send, as well as its own “international relations”, but did not go into **specifics**.

“The church has its own diplomacy, I am not allowed to give answers on their behalf,” he said. Wu was speaking outside Taipei’s **Catholic** **Archdiocese**, where he was accompanying Lai on a visit to pay respects to Francis. Lai did not speak to the press.

Later on Wednesday, Wu told reporters that Chen was “the best choice under the current **circumstances**”.

Past leaders of Taiwan have attended formal events at the Vatican. The former president Ma Ying-jeou attended Francis’s first **mass** as pope in 2013. His predecessor, Chen Shui-bian, represented Taiwan at the funeral of Pope John Paul II in 2005, and was seated according to Taiwan’s formal sovereign name, Republic of China.

Taiwan’s ambassador to the Vatican at the time said Chen’s attendance marked the first visit to Europe by a **sitting** Taiwanese president.

China’s government claims Taiwan as a province and does not allow other countries to have formal diplomatic relations with both governments. The vast majority of countries have chosen relations with China, with some having **switched back and forth** amid lobbying and **incentives** offered by both Taipei and Beijing. The remaining 12 allies of Taiwan are mostly small island nations in the Pacific and **Caribbean**. The Vatican is significant as Taiwan’s only ally in Europe, and “the value of being officially recognised by the Vatican is **amplified** by the significant influence it has globally as the head of the Catholic church”, said Zsuzsa Anna Ferenczy, assistant professor at Taiwan’s National Dong Hwa University, who is an expert on China-Europe relations.

“Taiwan’s fear is that a Vatican-China rapprochement could lead to/**pave** the way to the end of Vatican-Taiwan diplomatic ties, which has put Taiwan’s leadership in a tight spot,” she said.

“Taipei has had good reason to worry about the Vatican’s interactions with China in recent years, which, ironically, have unfolded amid increasing restrictions by the Chinese authorities on religious freedom in the country.”

China’s relations with the Vatican appeared to improve under Francis, who oversaw controversial agreements with Beijing about the appointments of Catholic **bishops** in China. The Chinese government insists that such appointments are a matter of sovereignty and must be government-approved.

Beijing did not issue public condolences to the Vatican until a foreign ministry press briefing on Tuesday.

“In recent years China and the Vatican have maintained **constructive engagement**, conducted useful exchanges, and had extensive communication on international issues,” the ministry spokesperson Guo Jiakun told reporters.

Guo was asked about Pope Francis’s repeated wishes that he could visit China and meet leaders, and whether breaking ties with Taiwan was a **prerequisite** for this to ever happen with a future **pontiff**. He responded that Taiwan was “an **inalienable** part of China’s territory”.

He would not confirm whether China planned to send anyone to the funeral.

#### [2025-04-24 How has India reacted to attack in Kashmir and why are tensions in region so high](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/apr/24/how-has-india-reacted-to-attack-in-kashmir-and-why-are-tensions-in-region-so-high)

Tensions between the **arch-rivals** India and Pakistan have escalated rapidly after the massacre of 25 Indian tourists and a Nepalese citizen in the disputed Himalayan Kashmir region on Tuesday, prompting warnings of a return to conflict.

A previously unknown Islamic militant group calling itself the Resistance Front has claimed responsibility for the attack, which India immediately linked to Pakistan, although it did not publicly produce any evidence. Pakistan has denied any involvement.

Among a string of punitive measures announced since Tuesday, India has downgraded diplomatic ties, suspended a crucial water-sharing treaty and revoked all visas **issued** to Pakistani nationals.

In retaliation, Pakistan has closed its airspace for all Indian-owned or Indian-operated airlines, and suspended all trade with India, including to and from any third country.

The region, in the **foothills** of the Himalayas, has been disputed since India and Pakistan **came into being** in 1947. Both claim it in full, but each controls a section of the territory, separated by one of the world’s most heavily militarised borders: the “line of control” based on a ceasefire border established after the 1947-48 war. China controls another part in the east.

India and Pakistan have gone to war a further two times over Kashmir, **most recently** in 1999.

The dispute **stems from** the **partition** of colonial India in 1947, when small, **semi-autonomous** “**princely** states” across the subcontinent were being folded into India or Pakistan, and the local ruler chose to become part of India despite the fact the area had a Muslim majority.

Armed insurgents in Kashmir have resisted Delhi for decades, with many Muslim Kashmiris supporting the rebels’ goal of uniting the territory either under Pakistani rule or as an independent country. India accuses Pakistan of backing militants – a claim Pakistan denies.

In 2019 Narendra Modi’s government launched a severe security **crackdown** in Indian-administered Kashmir and revoked the region’s special status, which had granted it limited **autonomy** since 1949.

The move **fulfilled** a longstanding **Hindu**-nationalist pledge and was widely welcomed across India, but angered many in the territory itself. Against a backdrop of widespread **repression**, insurgent violence tapered off and tourists returned to the region.

New rules were implemented that allowed outsiders to buy land in Kashmir for the first time, which many saw as an attempt by the Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) to **dispossess** them from their land and change the Muslim demography of the region.

Under its special status Kashmir had been able to define who its permanent residents were, preventing incomers from other parts of India from applying for jobs, scholarships or buying land.

With the new **domicile** rule, India widened who was **eligible** to live and work in Kashmir, leading to accusations that it was trying to change the demographic make-up of the region. The Resistance Front cited this claim when it claimed Tuesday’s attack.

The attack – in the **midst** of a visit by the US vice-president, JD Vance – was highly embarrassing for Modi and his BJP party, which has been boasting since 2019 about the success of its security policies in Kashmir.

The anger in India has been exacerbated by the **sectarian** nature of the attack, during which some of the male tourists were reportedly asked to **recite** Islamic **verses** to determine who would be killed.

While some of the **bellicose** rhetoric that has been visible in the past few days is familiar from past crises between India and Pakistan that have fallen short of war, India’s decision to suspend the 1964 Indus Waters treaty is a very big deal.

The treaty, which has survived endless crises over the years, is one of the world’s most successful water-sharing agreements, allowing for sharing the waters of a river system that is a lifeline for both countries.

Pakistani agriculture’s massive reliance on the Indus system’s waters for **irrigation** makes the treaty crucial for the country. Pakistan has said any interference with water flow would be treated as “an act of war”.

The last major conflict fought between India and Pakistan was the 1999 Kargil war, which was limited in comparison with previous conflicts.

While much is made of the fact that both countries **retain** nuclear weapons, **conventional wisdom** is that this has tended to limit rather than exacerbate the danger of serious conflict in recent decades.

However, past militant attacks – in 2016 and 2019 – have resulted in Indian military retaliation. Many observers believe that bar means that India will like launch airstrikes on militants across the border as a minimum response.

#### [2025-04-27 Taiwan cracks down on holders of Chinese ID amid fears over propaganda and espionage](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/apr/27/taiwan-chinese-passport-id-card-crackdown)

Taiwan has launched a crackdown on holders of illegal Chinese identity documents, **revoking** the Taiwanese **status** of more than 20 people and putting tens of thousands of Chinese-born residents under scrutiny.

Under Taiwan law it is illegal for Taiwanese people to hold Chinese identity documents. In the past decade, hundreds of people have had their Taiwanese **papers** or passports cancelled for also holding Chinese ID, effectively revoking their **citizenship**.

But a renewed hunt for dual ID-holders has drawn controversy after the public expulsion of three women and threats to the permanent residencies of more than 10,000 Chinese-born people, including many who had built lives and families in Taiwan over decades.

The campaign has sparked a nationwide **debate** about identity, loyalty and how to balance the island’s **treasured** political freedoms with its national security.

The current **furore** began in December, with an online **documentary** revealing local Chinese authorities were secretly offering Chinese IDs to Taiwanese people.

Taiwan’s mainland affairs council (MAC) denounced the scheme as “part of China’s evil united front work that attempts to … create an illusion that it has authority over the nation”.

The documentary identified three **recipients** who had moved to the Chinese province of Fujian and applied for Chinese identity cards.

Su Shih-er was one of the three. He chose the **coastal province** for its large Taiwanese community and generous government **subsidies** for **entrepreneurs** opening “local” businesses. Soon after arriving, Su learned he could apply for a Chinese identity card.

“I thought it’d be more convenient for my company, so I applied,” he told the Guardian.

What Su did was illegal under Taiwanese law, although he disputes this. To get his Chinese ID card, Su was legally required to have Chinese household registration (known as “hukou”), which is barred under Taiwan’s cross-strait relations act, alongside Chinese passports.

Su, who is still in China, said there are “loads” of Taiwanese with Fujian IDs, and that he felt “like a victim of their political games”.

Tensions between Taiwan and China are dangerously high. China’s Communist party (CCP) government claims Taiwan as a province and is preparing to take it militarily if it can’t convince or coerce it to peacefully “unify”. Espionage and infiltration by pro-CCP actors – including from Taiwan’s society, government, and military – are real and ongoing dangers.

But there are still close ties between the two territories. Figures from 2022 show about 170,000 Taiwanese living in China. About 380,000 Chinese-born people live in Taiwan, many married to Taiwanese people, and about half of them hold permanent residency.

In March Taiwan’s president, Lai Ching-te, announced new measures to counter China’s **malign** efforts, which included increased scrutiny of cross-strait travel and **resettlement**.

In March, three Chinese-born women were accused of using their popular social media accounts to advocate for a **hostile** Chinese **takeover** of Taiwan. Taiwan revoked their residency visas and they were forced to leave Taiwan, as well as their Taiwanese husbands and children.

The opposition accused the government of deporting people without **due process** for views it didn’t like. A statement signed by dozens of local academics said President Lai was “rapidly compressing the space for free speech”.

But government figures said the posts were **essentially** enemy war propaganda, exempt from free-speech protection. Premier Cho Jung-tai told reporters: “There are limits to freedom of speech, and the limits are the country’s survival.” The deportations also seemed to have social support, and at a press conference held by one of the women, a crowd chanted “go home!”.

The case highlighted “the unique **dilemma** of Taiwan’s existence”, wrote two local academics, Michelle Kuo and Albert Wu.

“Imagine a world where an ally of China expels a Taiwanese immigrant for advocating Taiwanese independence. We would fight to the death for that person to stay in the country,” said Wu and Kuo.

But, they added: “Taiwan is under **exceptional** threat. Can we apply human rights principles around family unity and freedom of speech when facing such a massive danger?”

The Taiwan government’s next move proved even more controversial. As it became clear the number of people holding or seeking Chinese IDs was larger than anticipated, authorities decided to sweep the island.

“If the identities of the people on both sides of the Taiwan Strait are not clearly distinguished, it will affect the national security and social stability of our country,” it said.

In March the MAC sent **questionnaires** to public sector workers, university employees and military personnel, asking them if they ever held Chinese ID. The MAC described the survey as an opportunity to “demonstrate their loyalty”.

Then, earlier this month, the National Immigration Agency (NIA) began contacting more than 10,000 Chinese-born **spouses** in Taiwan, claiming they had never provided proof they had given up their Chinese hukuo – a requirement for permanent residency.

Social media filled with angry posts from affected people and their families, saying they felt targeted and suddenly unwelcome. Among them were people who had moved to Taiwan decades ago, before such proof was required.

**Rescinding** hukou can only be done in person, in China. Some commenters pointed to the case of Li Yanhe, a Chinese-born, Taiwan-based publisher of critical books about the CCP. In 2023 Li was arrested in Shanghai, reportedly there to rescind his hukou. Convicted of unspecified acts of “**inciting** **secession**”, he remains in a Chinese jail.

One woman posted to Threads a recording of a call between her mother and the NIA. Her mother told the NIA agent she had given proof to another agency when she arrived 22 years ago. But the agent said they had no record, and threatened to strip her Taiwanese rights and residency if she failed to cooperate.

“My mother has become an international football,” her daughter posted.

In another case, a woman said her mother – who had lived her for 33 years – had also received a demand for proof.

“My mother has a Taiwanese ID card, a Taiwanese passport and has paid labour insurance and health insurance and taxes for more than 30 years. She is a Taiwanese!” the woman said.

The MAC deputy head, Liang Wen-chieh, said last week they were demonstrating “utmost **leniency** towards such individuals”. But amid an **outcry** the government announced **case-by-case** exemptions, including for people who are elderly, haven’t returned to China in more than 10 years, or feared **persecution** if they did.

The new campaign has so far resulted in at least 19 people being stripped of Taiwanese papers – and citizenship if they held it – for having Chinese ID.

The NIA, told the Guardian those who cancelled their Chinese hukou could apply for permission to “restore their [Taiwan] status” and come back.

But critics worry that the crackdown is only further dividing Taiwan’s already fractious society.

“It is obvious that a negative impact is to tear Taiwan apart and push people to the opposite side, which is of no benefit to Taiwan’s security,” said Prof Liu Mei-jun, of Taiwan’s national Chengchi university.

During the furore over the deported influencers, academics Kuo and Wu warned that the government “may have **inadvertently** handed Beijing an easy propaganda victory”.

China’s state media has already seized on the cases, accusing Taiwan’s ruling DPP of “tearing families apart”. The Taiwan Affairs Office accused the DPP of bullying, and only applying the idea of “freedom” to those who supported Taiwan independence.

The Guardian’s conversations with people in or close to the government have revealed a **perplexity** over the **backlash**, and a belief that any concerns are **outweighed** by the need to address any vulnerability China could exploit.

“More than 360,000 Chinese spouses live in Taiwan today,” Kuo and Wu wrote in their essay. “While they may appear to be a demographic minority, their family networks make up a significant portion of society – one the government now risks **alienating**.”

#### [2025-04-28 Putin and Kim confirm for first time North Koreans fought for Russia in Ukraine war](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/apr/28/north-korea-troops-fighting-for-russia-ukraine-confirmed-kim-jong-un)

Vladimir Putin and Kim Jong-un have confirmed for the first time that North Korea has sent troops to fight for Russia in the war with Ukraine, with both leaders describing the soldiers as “heroes”.

The acknowledgment comes amid claims by the Kremlin – **contested** by Ukraine – that North Korean forces helped recapture Russia’s Kursk region.

“The Russian people will never forget the **heroism** of the Korean special forces. We will always honour the Korean heroes who gave their lives for Russia and for our shared freedom, alongside their **brothers-in-arms** from the Russian **Federation**,” Putin said in a statement released by the Kremlin.

In a statement released on Monday, North Korea’s KCNA state news agency quoted the ruling party as saying that the end of the battle in Russia’s Kursk region showed the “highest strategic level of the firm militant friendship” between North Korea and Russia.

The acknowledgment follows months of silence over the deployment, which has been widely reported in western media. The Kremlin also said Russia was ready to provide assistance to North Korea “similar to the support offered to its soldiers in the Kursk region”.

Russia claimed last week that Ukrainian forces had been expelled from the last Russian village they had been holding. Kyiv has denied the claim, however, and said Ukrainian troops were also still operating in Belgorod, another Russian region bordering Ukraine.

Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, said on Sunday that Ukraine’s army was still fighting in Kursk despite Moscow claiming the “liberation” of its western region.

“Our military continues to perform tasks in the Kursk and Belgorod regions – we are maintaining our presence on Russian territory,” he said in his evening address. In a statement earlier on Sunday, he conceded that the situation remained difficult in many areas, including Kursk.

The central military commission of North Korea’s ruling Workers’ party said Kim made the decision to deploy troops under the **comprehensive strategic partnership** treaty he signed with Putin in June 2024.

“Under the order of the **head of state**, the sub-units of the armed forces of the Republic regarded the territory of Russia as one of their country and proved the firm alliance between the two countries,” KCNA cited the commission as saying.

North Korea “regards it as an honour to have an alliance with such a powerful state as the Russian Federation”, KCNA added.

The agency quoted Kim as saying: “They who fought for justice are all heroes and representatives of the honour of the motherland.”

North Korea sent an estimated total of 14,000 troops, including 3,000 reinforcements, to replace those killed, injured or captured, Ukrainian officials have said. With no armoured vehicles or drone warfare experience, they took heavy casualties but adapted quickly, the officials added.

Russia confirmed on Saturday for the first time that North Korean soldiers had been fighting alongside Russians in Kursk. Neither Russia nor North Korea had previously either confirmed or denied the deployment.

The US state department said it was concerned by North Korea’s direct involvement in Russia’s war in Ukraine and that Pyongyang’s military deployment must end.

“We continue to be concerned by [North Korea’s] direct involvement in the war. [North Korea’s] military deployment to Russia and any support provided by the Russian Federation to [North Korea] in return must end,” a state department spokesperson said in an email, adding that third countries such as North Korea “**bear responsibility**” for the war.

Kim, whose **material support** for Putin could earn North Korea access to Russian satellite and military technology to boost its nuclear missile programme, said a **monument** would soon be built in the capital, Pyongyang, to honour his soldiers’ “battle **feats**”.

North Korea has also provided Russia with vast quantities of ammunition, artillery shells, ballistic missiles and other weapons. South Korea, the US and their partners worry that Russia could reward North Korea by transferring hi-tech weapons technologies for use in its nuclear weapons programme. North Korea is also expected to receive economic and other assistance from Russia.

Kim’s reference to “the **tombstones** of the **fallen soldiers**” is seen as public confirmation by the regime that North Korean troops had been killed in **combat**.

Zelenskyy has put the number of killed or wounded North Koreans at 4,000, though US estimates are lower, about 1,200.

Kim said North Korea must “take important national measures to specially honour and care for the families of war veterans”.

Experts said Moscow and Pyongyang were likely to have agreed in advance to publicly disclose the deployment.

“The two countries agreed to disclose the deployment because they judged that the benefits of compensation for the troop deployment **outweighed** the potential damage to their international image,” Yang Moo-jin, president of the University of North Korean Studies in Seoul, told Agence France-Presse.

By promising state benefits to the deployed troops, North Korea could also “sufficiently ease internal backlash”, Yang said, adding that the move reflected Pyongyang’s growing confidence.

“North Korea likely aimed to **showcase** that victory was achieved thanks to their involvement, thereby securing greater rewards from Russia,” he added.

#### [2024-04-28 China and Philippines display competing flags on disputed South China Sea sandbank](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/apr/28/china-philippines-flags-sandy-cay-south-china-sea)

China and the Philippines have displayed their national flags in competing photo opportunities on a disputed **sandbank** in the South China sea, **ratcheting** up longstanding regional tensions between the two countries.

The dispute played out at Sandy Cay, which is part of the disputed Spratly Islands, and comes days after the US and the Philippines launched their annual joint military drills called “Balikatan”, or “shoulder to shoulder”, which this year will include an **integrated** air and missile defence **simulation** for the first time.

The latest confrontation appears to have emerged on Thursday, when Chinese state media reported the Coast Guard landed on the disputed **reef** two weeks ago, **unfurled** a flag and “exercised sovereign jurisdiction”.

On Sunday, China’s coast guard then accused six Filipino personnel of “illegally boarding” Sandy Cay, which Beijing calls Tiexian Reef, earlier that day despite “warnings and **dissuasion**” from the Chinese side.

Spokesperson Liu Dejun said coast guard personnel then “boarded the reef and investigated and dealt with it in accordance with the law”.

“We urge the Philippines to immediately stop its infringement,” Liu said, adding that the actions “violated China’s territorial sovereignty”.

Sandy Cay is just a few kilometres from Thitu island, where the Philippines maintains a military **outpost**.

There do not appear to be any signs that China has permanently occupied the reef or has built a structure on it.

On Monday Philippines officials disputed China’s claim that it had gained control.

“The **facts on the ground** **belie** their statements,” National Security Council spokesperson Jonathan Malaya said. “It is not to the benefit of any nation if these things are happening, nor it is to the benefit of any nation if such **irresponsible** announcements and statements are released to the public and to the world.”

Chinese state broadcaster CCTV published a photograph of five **black-clad** people standing on the **uninhabited** reef as a dark inflatable boat **bobbed** in the nearby water. The group also “cleaned up **leftover** plastic bottles, wooden sticks and other debris and garbage on the reef”, the broadcaster reported.

Philippines Coast Guard spokesperson Jay Tarriela said on Sunday that its navy, coast guard and police personnel had deployed to Sandy Cay in four rubber boats and had “observed the illegal presence” of a Chinese Coast Guard vessel and seven China maritime militia vessels.

Posting footage of their own flag being displayed, Tarriela added: “This operation reflects the unwavering dedication and commitment of the Philippine government to uphold the country’s sovereignty, sovereign rights and jurisdiction in the West Philippine Sea.”

Beijing claims sovereignty over almost all of the South China Sea and has waved away competing assertions from other countries in the region as well as an international ruling that its position has no legal basis.

At the opening ceremony in Manila for the joint US-Philippines military drills, which began on Monday last week, US Marine Corps Lieutenant General James Glynn said the two sides would “demonstrate not just our will to uphold our mutual defence treaty in existence since 1951 but our matchless capability to do so”.

“Nothing builds bonds more quickly than shared adversity,” he said, without specifying a common threat.

Beijing said the military manoeuvres “undermine regional strategic stability” and accused Manila of “collusion with countries outside the region”.