---
layout: post
title:  "25年7月新闻摘选"
date:   2025-07-01 19:20:00 +0800
---

* 目录
{:toc #markdown-toc}

#### [2025-07-01 Kim Jong-un pays rare public tribute to North Korean soldiers killed in Ukraine](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/01/kim-jong-un-tribute-north-korea-soldiers-killed-ukraine-fighting)

Kim Jong-un has paid **tribute** to North Korean soldiers killed during Russia’s war with Ukraine, resting his hands on their repatriated **coffins** in a rare public acknowledgment that his armed forces have suffered fatalities in the conflict.

Photographs of the North Korean leader pausing in front of a line of half a dozen coffins draped in the country’s flag were displayed on a screen at a **gala** performance held on Sunday to mark the first anniversary of a military treaty between the North and Russia.

The event at East Pyongyang Grand Theatre combined performances by North Korean and visiting Russian artists with images celebrating a mutual defence pact agreed by Kim and the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, in Pyongyang in June last year.

The scenes showing Kim and the remains of fallen soldiers followed those of troops from both countries waving their national flags. One image purportedly showed pages from a blood-**stained** notebook, believed to have belonged to a North Korean soldier, that had been **retrieved** from a battlefield in Russia’s Kursk region.

According to South Korea’s Yonhap news agency, the messages in the notebook read: “The **decisive** moment has finally come,” and “Let us bravely fight this sacred battle with the boundless love and trust **bestowed** upon us by our **beloved** Supreme Commander” – a reference to Kim.

It was not immediately clear when the repatriation ceremony took place. Kim and other officials, including his influential sister, Kim Yo-jong, and the foreign minister, Choe Son-hui, are wearing winter clothing, suggesting that the soldiers’ remains may have been returned to the North several months ago.

Having denied for months that North Korean soldiers had been sent to fight alongside Russian forces, the regime is now attempting to put a positive **spin** on its involvement in the Ukraine conflict.

“North Korea probably wanted to frame the fallen soldiers not just as sacrifices but as part of a victory narrative,” Hong Min, a senior researcher at the Korea Institute for National Unification, told Yonhap.

“The footage appears to have been released after the two countries acknowledged the troop deployment” and declared their joint operation to reclaim the Kursk region in western Russia a success, Hong added.

Footage of the gala broadcast by North Korea’s state KRT television showed Kim, who appeared emotional at times, sitting alongside his guest, the Russian culture minister, Olga Lyubimova, and his daughter, Kim Ju-ae. People in the audience were shown wiping away tears.

The Korea Herald said the event was the first time state media had shown footage and photos of soldiers sent to Russia that can be seen by North Korean citizens.

The state-run KCNA news agency said the event had inspired confidence in the “ties of friendship and the genuine internationalist obligation between the peoples and armies of the two countries that were forged at the cost of blood”.

In April, Putin and Kim confirmed for the first time that North Korean troops had been deployed, with both leaders describing them as “heroes”.

Kim said at the time that a **monument** would be built in Pyongyang to honour his soldiers, and that flowers would be laid before the tombstones of those who had died – seen as the first public confirmation by the regime that its troops had been killed in combat.

The North has sent an estimated 15,000 troops to fight in the war since last autumn. It has suffered about 4,700 casualties, including 600 deaths, South Korean lawmakers said in April, while Seoul’s intelligence agency recently claimed that additional deployments could come in July or August.

North Korea has also provided Russia with large quantities of ammunition, artillery shells, ballistic missiles and other weapons, reportedly in return for weapons and satellite technology, and economic and other assistance from the Kremlin.

#### [2025-07-01 Ukraine war briefing: Russia claims to have seized all of Luhansk region](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/01/ukraine-war-briefing-russia-claims-to-have-seized-all-of-luhansk-region-and-first-village-in-dnipropetrovsk)

Moscow’s forces have seized all of Luhansk – one of four regions Russia illegally annexed from Ukraine in September 2022 despite not fully controlling a single one – Leonid Pasechnik, a Russia-appointed official there, said on Monday. If confirmed, that would make Luhansk the first Ukrainian region to be fully occupied by Russia after more than three years of war. There was no immediate comment from Kyiv on Pasechnik’s claim. In remarks to Russia’s state TV Channel One that aired Monday evening, Pasechnik said he had received a report “**literally** two days ago” saying that “100%” of the region was now under the control of Russian forces.

Russian forces have captured a village in the Ukrainian region of Dnipropetrovsk for the first time in their three-year offensive, Russian state media and pro-war bloggers have claimed. Dnipropetrovsk, which lies to the west of the Donetsk region, is not among the five Ukrainian regions over which Russia has asserted a formal territorial claim. There was no immediate confirmation from Ukrainian officials or from the Russian defence ministry.

North Korea’s state media showed on Monday leader Kim Jong-un draping coffins with the national flag in what appeared to be the repatriation of soldiers killed fighting for Russia against Ukraine, as the countries marked a **landmark** military treaty. In a series of photographs displayed in the backdrop of a gala performance by North Korean and visiting Russian artists in Pyongyang, Kim is seen by rows of a half a dozen coffins, covering them with flags and pausing **briefly** with both hands resting on them.

The European Union said Monday it had agreed a new long-term trade deal with Ukraine, covering imports of food products from the **war-torn** country that have angered EU farmers. Brussels and Kyiv have been **wrangling** over the deal after protests from farmers saw the EU slap **quotas** on tariff-free Ukrainian agricultural imports into the bloc. Brussels added certain restrictions in 2024, when it extended the agreement for one additional year, by introducing a maximum **ceiling** on certain tariff-free products such as **cereals**, **poultry**, eggs, sugar and corn. The European Commission said that under the new deal – which still needs to be finalised – quotas would remain for those sensitive agricultural areas. In return, Kyiv will cut its quotas for pork, poultry and sugar imported from the EU and push to align its food production standards with those of the 27-nation bloc by 2028, Brussels said.

The International Monetary Fund said on Monday it has completed its eighth review of Ukraine’s \$15.5bn four-year support program, paving the way for a **disbursement** of an additional \$500m to the war-torn country. That will bring total disbursements to $10.6bn, the IMF said in a statement, after its board’s approval of the review of Ukraine’s Extended Fund Facility. It warned of **ongoing** and “exceptionally high” risks to the country’s **outlook**.

Russian President Vladimir Putin “wants to **subjugate** the whole of Ukraine and at the same time spread fear throughout Europe,” German Foreign Minister Johann Wadephul said on a visit to Kyiv on Monday, adding that Putin’s “alleged willingness to negotiate is just a **facade**.” Kyiv and its allies have accused Russia of sabotaging diplomatic efforts, which have stalled in recent weeks, despite Washington’s desires to reach a quick peace deal.

US President Donald Trump’s senior envoy for Ukraine and Russia Keith Kellog also said on Monday that Russia cannot continue to stall for time “while it bombs civilian targets in Ukraine.” “We urge an immediate ceasefire and a move to **trilateral** talks to end the war,” Kellogg wrote on X.

#### [2025-07-02 Quad countries agree to diversify critical mineral supplies amid China concerns](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/02/quad-countries-agree-to-diversify-critical-mineral-supplies-amid-china-concerns)

The United States, Japan, India and Australia have pledged to work together to ensure a stable supply of critical minerals, as worries grow over China’s dominance in resources vital to new technologies.

The four countries said in a joint statement that they were establishing the Quad Critical Minerals Initiative, aimed at “collaborating on securing and **diversifying**” supply chains.

They offered little detail but made clear the goal was to reduce reliance on China, which has used restrictions **as leverage** as the US in turn curbs its access to semiconductors and threatens steep tariffs.

China holds major reserves of several key minerals including the vast majority of the world’s **graphite**, which is crucial for electric vehicles.

US secretary of state Marco Rubio welcomed his counterparts from the so-called “Quad” grouping to Washington on Tuesday in a shift of focus to Asia, after spending much of his first six months on the wars in Ukraine and the Middle East and on president Donald Trump’s domestic priorities, such as migration.

In brief remarks alongside the other ministers, Rubio said he has “personally been very focused” on diversifying supply chains and wanted “real progress”.

In a joint statement, the Quad countries said: “Reliance on any one country for processing and refining critical minerals and **derivative** goods production exposes our industries to economic coercion, price manipulation and supply chain disruptions.”

The ministers were careful not to mention China by name but also voiced “serious concerns regarding dangerous and provocative actions” in the South China Sea and East China Sea that “threaten peace and stability in the region”.

Rubio had welcomed the Quad foreign ministers on 21 January in his first meeting after Trump’s inauguration, seen as a sign the new administration would prioritise engagement with **like-minded** countries to counter China.

But to the surprise of many, China has not topped the **early agenda** of Trump, who has spoken respectfully about his counterpart, Xi Jinping, and moved to ease tensions in a wider trade war between the world’s two largest economies.

Trump is expected to travel to India later this year for a Quad summit.

Both the Indian and Japanese foreign ministers said they wanted the Quad to focus on a “free and open Indo-Pacific” – a **phrasing** that is a **veiled** **allusion** to opposing Chinese dominance in Asia.

“It is **essential** that nations of the Indo-Pacific have the freedom of choice, so essential to make right decisions on development and security,” Indian foreign minister Subrahmanyam Jaishankar said.

At Jaishankar’s urging, the Quad also condemned a May attack on the Indian side of Kashmir that killed mostly Hindu civilians and called for “the **perpetrators**, organisers and financiers of this **reprehensible** act to be brought to justice without any delay”.

In a key concern for Japan, the Quad condemned North Korea for its “destabilising launches” of missiles and insisted on its “complete **denuclearisation**”.

Despite common ground on China, Quad members have differed on other hotspots, with the joint statement not mentioning Ukraine or Iran.

India has maintained its long relationship with Russia despite the invasion of Ukraine, while both India and Japan also have historically enjoyed **cordial** ties with Iran.

#### [2025-07-02 ‘A billion people backing you’: China transfixed as Musk turns against Trump](https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2025/jul/02/a-billion-people-backing-you-china-transfixed-as-musk-turns-against-trump)

Few **break-ups** have as many **gossiping** observers as the fallout between the once **inseparable** Donald Trump and Elon Musk.

The ill-fated bromance between the US president and the world’s richest man, which once raised questions about American **oligarchy**, is now being **pored** over by social media users in China, many of whom are Team Musk.

The latest drama comes from Musk’s pledge to found a new political party, the America party, if Trump’s sweeping tax and spending bill, which Musk described as “insane” passed the Senate this week (it did). Musk had already vowed to unseat lawmakers who backed Trump’s **flagship** piece of legislation, which is expected to increase US national debt by $3.3tn.

On Wednesday, hours after the bill passed the US Senate, the hashtag #MuskWantsToBuildAnAmericaParty went viral on Weibo, a Chinese social media platform similar to Musk’s X, receiving more than 37m views.

“If Elon Musk were to found a political party, his tech-driven mindset could inject fresh energy into politics. The potential for change is significant – and worth watching,” wrote one Weibo user.

“When you’ve had enough, there’s no need to keep putting up with it,” wrote another.

One comment **summed up** the mood on the platform: “Brother Musk, you’ve got over a billion people on our side backing you.”

Musk, the CEO of Tesla and SpaceX, is widely **venerated** in China for his business **acumen** and technological achievements. Tesla’s electric vehicles are the only western brand on Chinese roads that can rival domestic firms, and the company’s biggest factory by volume is in Shanghai. Musk is known to have a close relationship with China’s premier, Li Qiang, while Musk’s mother, Maye Musk, is a social media celebrity **in her own right** in China.

Musk’s popularity in China follows a well-established trend of Chinese audiences **enthusiastically** embracing US tech innovators. Walter Isaacson’s biography of Steve Jobs was a bestseller in China, as was his biography of Musk.

Trump, however, is seen by many as being an unpredictable funnyman who has launched the most **aggressive** trade war on China in recent history.

Some internet users commented that Trump and Musk should grow up. “These two grown men argue **nonstop** over the smallest things – and the whole world ends up knowing about it,” wrote one user, while another joked: “Every day, Musk is basically live-streaming ‘How Billionaires Argue’”.

The conversation has been allowed to **flourish** on China’s tightly controlled social media, suggesting that at least some censors are betting that the US political chaos could be no bad thing for China.

#### [2025-07-02 US halts weapons shipments to Ukraine over fears stockpiles are too low](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/02/us-halts-ukraine-weapons-shipments)

The US is halting some shipments of weapons to Ukraine amid concerns that its own stockpiles have declined too much, officials said Tuesday, a setback for the country as it tries to fend off escalating attacks from Russia.

Certain munitions were previously promised to Ukraine under the Biden administration to aid its defences during the more than three-year-old war. The pause reflects a new set of priorities under President Donald Trump and came after defence department officials scrutinised US stockpiles and raised concerns.

“This decision was made to put America’s interests first following a review of our nation’s military support and assistance to other countries across the globe,” White House spokesperson Anna Kelly said in a statement. “The strength of the United States Armed Forces remains **unquestioned** – just ask Iran.”

That was a reference to Trump recently ordering US missile strikes against nuclear sites in Iran.

The Pentagon review determined that stocks were too low on some weapons previously pledged, so pending shipments of some items won’t be sent, according to a US official who spoke on condition of anonymity to provide information that has not yet been made public.

The defence department did not provide details on what specific weapons were being **held back**.

“America’s military has never been more ready and more capable,” spokesperson Sean Parnell said, adding that the major tax cut and spending package moving through Congress “ensures that our weapons and defence systems are modernised to protect against 21st century threats for **generations to come**.”

The halt of some weapons from the US is a blow to Ukraine as Russia has recently launched some of its biggest aerial attacks of the war, in an escalating bombing campaign that has further **dashed** hopes for a breakthrough in peace efforts **championed** by Trump. Talks between the sides have ground to a halt.

The US **stoppage** was first reported by Politico.

**To date**, the US has provided Ukraine more than $66bn worth of weapons and military assistance since Russia invaded its neighbour in February 2022.

Over the course of the war, the US has routinely pressed for allies to provide air defence systems to Ukraine. But many are reluctant to give up the hi-tech systems, particularly countries in eastern Europe that also feel threatened by Russia.

Trump met with Ukrainian leader Volodymyr Zelenskyy on the sidelines of the Nato summit last week and had left open the possibility of sending Kyiv more US-made Patriot air defence missile systems, acknowledging they would help the Ukrainian cause.

“They do want to have the antimissile missiles, OK, as they call them, the Patriots,” Trump said then. “And we’re going to see if we can make some available. We need them, too. We’re supplying them to Israel, and they’re very effective, 100% effective. Hard to believe how effective. They do want that more than any other thing.”

Those comments reflect a change of thinking about providing weapons to Ukraine across the administration in recent months.

In **testimony** before lawmakers in June, defence secretary Pete Hegseth said he had moved quickly to **quash** wasteful programmes and redirect funding to Trump’s top objectives.

Hegseth said a negotiated peace between Russia and Ukraine, which has been promoted for months by Trump, makes America look strong, even though Moscow is the aggressor in the conflict. He also said the defence budget includes hard choices and “reflects the reality that Europe needs to step up more for the defence of its own continent. And President Trump **deserves** the **credit** for that.”

The defense secretary told lawmakers last month that some US security spending for Ukraine was still in the **pipeline**, without providing details. But he said such assistance – which has been robust for the past two years – would be reduced.

#### [2025-07-02 Dalai Lama defies China to say successor will be chosen by Tibetan tradition](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/02/dalai-lama-says-there-will-be-search-for-his-successor-ending-years-of-speculation)

The Dalai Lama has declared in a direct challenge to China that the **centuries-old** spiritual institution bearing his name will continue after his death and that only his inner circle, not Beijing, will have the authority to identify his successor.

In a video message played on Wednesday during prayer celebrations ahead of his 90th birthday this weekend, the 14th Dalai Lama said the Gaden Phodrang Trust, which manages his affairs, would oversee the search for his **reincarnation**.

“No one else has any such authority to interfere in this matter,” he said in Dharamshala, the northern Indian hill town that serves as the seat of the Tibetan government in exile. “In accordance with past tradition, the search for my reincarnation and the naming of a 15th Dalai Lama will be carried out.”

The Dalai Lama had previously hinted he might be the last in the line, but he said consultations with senior spiritual leaders and appeals from the Tibetan public, including in Chinese-ruled Tibet, had persuaded him otherwise.

“In accordance with all these requests, I am affirming that the **institution** of the Dalai Lama will continue,” he told the gathering of senior Buddhist monks. He said clear written instructions would be left behind, but did not **elaborate** on their contents.

China annexed Tibet in 1951 and has retained tight control over the region ever since. It has said the choice of the next Dalai Lama lies only with Beijing, and has **enshrined** state **assent** for all senior Tibetan religious leaders in law. It insists the golden **urn** – a Qing dynasty **ritual** in which names are drawn by lot from a ceremonial vessel – is the only legitimate method for recognising reincarnated lamas. The Communist party must approve the final selection.

Beijing has already used this approach to assert control. After the death of the 10th Panchen Lama, Tibet’s second-highest spiritual authority, in 1995, the Dalai Lama recognised a six-year-old boy as his reincarnation. The boy and his family vanished into Chinese **custody** days later and have not been seen since. China **installed** its own candidate, widely rejected by Tibetans. According to Chinese state media, the Beijing-backed Panchen Lama met President Xi Jinping just last month and pledged loyalty to the Communist party.

The Dalai Lama has said his successor will be born in a free country, raising the possibility that the next reincarnation could emerge from among the Tibetan diaspora, which numbers about 140,000 globally, half of them in India. He has also said the next Dalai Lama might be an adult and not necessarily male.

“Today’s message is that the Dalai Lama institution will continue,” Lobsang Tenzin, the trust’s second-most senior leader and known by his religious title Samdhong Rinpoche, told a news conference in Dharamshala. “There will be a 15th Dalai Lama. There will be a 16th.” He said the Dalai Lama would issue detailed instructions on how the search for the next reincarnation should proceed.

Beijing swiftly rejected the Dalai Lama’s statement. “The reincarnation of the Dalai Lama, the Panchen Lama, and other great Buddhist figures must be chosen by drawing lots from a golden urn and approved by the central government,” said the Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, Mao Ning.

“Tibetan Buddhism was born in China and is a religion with Chinese characteristics,” she told a news briefing.

The clash underscores a long-running power struggle between Beijing and the Dalai Lama over who controls Tibetan Buddhism’s most sacred office. Most Tibetan Buddhists, in Tibet and in exile, oppose China’s tight control of the region.

Tibetan Buddhists believe the Dalai Lama is the **earthly** **manifestation** of Avalokiteshvara, a **revered** figure in Buddhism known as the **bodhisattva** of **compassion** – a spiritual being who remains in the world to guide others on the path to **enlightenment**.

By tradition, only the current Dalai Lama, or those he appoints, can identify his successor, using visions, **omens** and consultation with senior lamas and protectors of the faith.

Tenzin Gyatso was recognised the 14th reincarnation at the age of two. He assumed full authority at 15 and fled Tibet four years later when Chinese troops crushed an uprising in the Tibetan capital, Lhasa, in 1959. He has been living in exile in Dharamshala since.

He was awarded the Nobel peace prize in 1989 “for advocating peaceful solutions based upon tolerance and mutual respect”.He wrote in a recent book: “The purpose of a reincarnation is to carry on the work of the predecessor. The new Dalai Lama will be born in the free world.”

The deputy speaker of the Tibetan parliament in exile, Dolma Tsering Teykhang, said: “The world needs to hear directly from His Holiness. China tries to **vilify** him at every chance … It is trying to frame rules and regulations on how to have the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama in their hand.”

The succession dispute has also sharpened tensions between China and India, which granted asylum to the Dalai Lama after he fled Tibet. More than 100,000 Tibetans live in exile in India. Delhi officially recognises Tibet as part of China, but it also allows the Tibetan government in exile to operate from Dharamshala.

The reincarnation issue has drawn global attention. The US passed the Tibetan Policy and Support Act in 2020, threatening sanctions on Chinese officials who interfere in the selection process. The EU has voiced support for religious freedom in Tibet, but it has stopped short of taking a formal position on reincarnation.

#### [2025-07-04 Hong Kong code of conduct will oblige legislators to ‘sincerely support’ Beijing](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/04/hong-kong-code-of-conduct-sincerely-support-beijing)

A new **code** of conduct in Hong Kong will require legislators to “sincerely support” Beijing’s jurisdiction on the city and the chief executive, and **prohibits** anything that might “vilify” the government.

The proposal for the new code, introduced on Wednesday, included **tiered** penalties for legislators who breach the code, including **suspension** without payment for the most serious offences.

It **stipulated** that legislators must “sincerely support the central government’s overall jurisdiction while securing the Hong Kong SAR’s special administrative region’s high degree of autonomy”, as well as the principle of “patriots administering Hong Kong”, referring to election reforms which ensure that only pro-Beijing candidates can run.

“They should not intentionally vilify the governance credibility of the chief executive and the SAR government, nor should they deliberately undermine or weaken the effectiveness of executive-led governance,” it said.

The president of the legislative council of Hong Kong, Andrew Leung, told media the new rules wouldn’t restrict legislators from speaking up, but they must be careful to “not cross the red line”, Hong Kong Free Press reported.

Hong Kong’s governance system has undergone major **overhauls** in recent years, after a crackdown on the city’s pro-democracy movement and politicians saw major interventions by the government in Beijing.

Every major democratic party has **disbanded** or begun the process of disbandment, and thousands of people – including politicians and activists – have been prosecuted under national security laws.

A separate proposal this week flags new prison rules which include only allowing visits pre-approved by the **correctional** services department, would empower the department to consider restrictions on **clergy** visits, and seek rulings to bar visits by specific legal representatives to imprisoned clients.

“In the past, some people have abused the visiting mechanism and conducted visits in the name of ‘humanitarian support’,” said the amendment proposal. “In fact, they are using soft means to influence prisoners, intending to incite them to resist the **supervision** of the correctional services department, **arouse** their hatred towards the central government and the SAR government, and even make them become potential risks to national security and public safety after returning to society.”

The crackdown on Hong Kong’s pro-democracy population has been widely criticised by human rights and legal groups. Senior foreign judges have left or resigned from Hong Kong’s **appeal court**, with several specifically citing concerns over the new environment. Hong Kong authorities reject the claims.

In an interview published by an academic journal this week, the UK’s Brenda Marjorie Hale, who quietly declined an offer to extend her post on the Hong Kong court in 2021, said she was now “all the more convinced that it was the right thing to do”.

“Because, as things have developed, the National Security Law has taken over the Basic Law,” she said, referring to Hong Kong’s mini constitution.

“Even though the foreign judges are not likely to be asked to sit on national security cases, they are being asked to give respectability to a system that despite the best efforts ... are not going to succeed.”

#### [2025-07-04 Japan walks line between recession and submission as it seeks to overcome Trump tariffs](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/04/japan-submission-recession-trump-tariffs)

It all seemed to be going so well. In April, Japan’s chief trade negotiator, Ryosei Akazawa, sat opposite Donald Trump in the Oval Office after “positive and constructive” talks, **sporting** a Maga baseball cap and giving a thumbs up for the cameras.

Japan’s economic **revitalisation** minister drew criticism back home for the gesture, forcing him to insist there was “no political significance” behind it. But the backdrop to the offending photo was far more significant than the uncomfortable **optics**.

Akazawa’s trade delegation was in Washington to begin tariff negotiations with its American counterparts that officials in Tokyo were initially optimistic would end with Japan’s exemption from Trump’s most **egregious** protectionist **instincts**.

“A Great Honor to have just met with the Japanese Delegation on Trade,” Trump wrote on Truth Social after meeting Akazawa. “Big Progress!”

Eleven weeks and seven rounds of talks later, Japan and the US have reached an impasse, with Trump unleashing on his country’s most important ally in the Asia-Pacific the kind of **invective** he once reserved for China and the European Union: “They won’t take our RICE, and yet they have a massive rice shortage,” he wrote online, adding it showed “how **spoiled** countries have become”.

The friction is beginning to **seep** into other parts of the bilateral relationship, with Tokyo and Washington at odds, to varying degrees, on the cost of hosting American troops in Japan and recent attacks by the US and Israel on Iran.

**To add insult to injury**, the **chasm** that has opened up between Tokyo and Washington on trade came as the US agreed to slash reciprocal tariffs on Vietnamese imports from 46% to 20%.

Japan now has just days before the end of Trump’s 90-day pause on the imposition of punishing tariffs to pull off a breakthrough.

Much will depend on Akazawa’s ability to convince American negotiators to withdraw or reduce a 25% levy on Japanese cars imposed in April. That is on top of a possible rise in reciprocal duties on other Japanese goods to 24% from the current baseline of 10%.

But if anything, the **mood music** from Washington indicates that Trump is even less inclined to make **concessions** ahead of the president’s second tariff “liberation day”, despite constant reminders from senior politicians in Tokyo of the value Japan brings to the US economy.

They include the prime minister, Shigeru Ishiba, who noted this week that Japan is the largest foreign investor in the US and its biggest contributor in terms of job creation. “Our hope is that this will be taken into consideration,” he said.

Just days earlier, Trump had framed Japan in terms that prompted as much **consternation** as anger on this side of the Pacific.

Speaking to reporters on Air Force One, he floated the idea of raising tariffs on imports from Japan to 30% or 35%, and **bemoaned** its consumers’ lack of enthusiasm for American cars and rice.

“I’m not sure we’re going to make a deal. I doubt it,” Trump said, labelling Japan “very tough” and “very spoiled”.

Japan has much to lose if it fails to secure an extension to the deadline on reciprocal tariffs or convince the US to lower duties. The US is Japan’s second-biggest trading partner after China, with exports to the US totalling $148.2bn last year.

Trade between the two countries was worth an estimated $227.9bn last year, while the autos sector is already suffering from existing tariffs, with exports to the US dropping 25% in May compared to a year ago.

That will not put the brakes on Trump’s mission to **hack away** at Japan’s $68bn trade **surplus** with the US – hence his recent demands that it increase imports of US oil and other goods.

The **trade row** has landed Ishiba and his government in a predicament every bit as sticky as the early-summer heat and humidity **blanketing** Japan.

**Battered** by funding scandals, soaring rice prices and a cost-of-living crisis, Ishiba’s administration is **limping** into the campaign for upper house elections on 20 July, nine months after his Liberal Democratic party (LDP) and its junior coalition partner lost their majority in the lower house.

Any **inkling** that Tokyo is prepared to bend to Trump’s demands will not go down well with voters, while analysts warn that the economic impact of accepting higher tariffs could push the Japanese economy – the world’s fifth biggest – into recession.

Japan’s rice crisis has also become a point of **contention**, as the government attempts to bring down prices with the release of almost all of its 1m tonnes of stockpiled grain, along with a rise in cheaper imports.

Japan has imported historically high volumes of US rice in recent months, and yet despite Trump’s threats, is reluctant to agree to anything that would ignite anger among rice farmers – a politically influential group in the LDP.

Washington is also pressuring Japan to boost imports of other US farm products, as well as cars and oil, to help reduce the trade deficit.

Japan has declined to comment on Trump’s threat to impose even higher tariffs, saying it would pursue “sincere” bilateral talks. “We are aware of what President Trump said, but we don’t comment on every remark made by US government officials,” the deputy chief cabinet secretary, Kazuhiko Aoki, said this week

“We intend to advance bilateral talks in a sincere and **faithful** manner toward reaching an agreement that will benefit both Japan and the United States.”

Tariffs, though, are putting **strain** on what the former US ambassador to Tokyo, Mike Mansfield, once described as the “most important bilateral relationship in the world, **bar none**”.

After failing to make progress with Trump during a meeting at the G7 in Canada last month, Ishiba abruptly cancelled plans to attend the Nato summit in The Hague – a move analysts attributed to ongoing friction over trade.

Japan also declined to offer **full-throated** support for the US attacks on Iran, saying only that it “understood” Washington’s determination to halt Tehran’s nuclear weapons programme.

This week, the US secretary of state, Marco Rubio, **called off** his first visit to Japan and South Korea, saying he was needed in Washington for talks with the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu.

Amid rumours that he is preparing to make yet another trip to Washington this weekend, Akazawa has limited room for **manoeuvre** – and precious little time, according to analysts.

“Practical and **electoral** constraints will prevent Japan from offering major concessions on autos, rice, and oil, with negotiators set to continue their slow-and-steady approach,” said James Brady, vice-president of the political risk advisory firm Teneo.

“The probability of a deal being reached before next week’s tariff deadline appears increasingly low.”

#### [2025-07-06 Dalai Lama celebrates his 90th birthday, triggering geopolitical questions for the future](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/06/dalai-lama-celebrates-his-90th-birthday-triggering-geopolitical-questions-for-the-future)

Leaders from India, the United States and Taiwan offered their support to Tibet’s exiled spiritual leader, the Dalai Lama, on his 90th birthday on Sunday, a landmark anniversary raising geopolitical questions for the future.

Tibetans fear China will eventually name a rival successor to the Dalai Lama, bolstering Beijing’s control over Tibet, the territory it poured troops into in 1950 and has ruled ever since.

The man who calls himself a “simple Buddhist monk” celebrated in India, where he has lived since he and thousands of other Tibetans fled Chinese troops who crushed an uprising in their capital, Lhasa, in 1959.

The Dalai Lama says only his India-based office has the right to identify his eventual successor.

“I join 1.4 billion Indians in extending our warmest wishes to His Holiness the Dalai Lama on his 90th birthday,” the Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, said in a statement, read at celebrations in the Himalayan hill town where the Dalai Lama lives.

“He has been an **enduring** symbol of love, compassion, patience and moral discipline,” he added.

China insisted on Wednesday that it would have the final say on who succeeds the Tibetan spiritual leader.

Modi’s **effusive** support is significant.

India and China are intense rivals competing for influence across south Asia, but have sought to repair ties after a 2020 border clash.

The US secretary of state, Marco Rubio, also said in a statement, read at the celebrations in India, that Washington was “committed to promoting respect for the human rights and fundamental freedoms of Tibetans”.

“We support efforts to preserve Tibetans’ **distinct** **linguistic**, cultural and religious **heritage**, including their ability to freely choose and venerate religious leaders without interference,” the statement added.

Taiwan’s president, Lai Ching-te – who leads an island that China says is part of its territory and has threatened to use force to seize – said in a statement read at the ceremony that the example set by the Dalai Lama “**resonates** with all who **cherish** freedom, democracy and respect for human rights”.

Messages from three former US presidents were also broadcast.

“At a time when we see the forces of division tearing at the **fabric** of our common humanity … I’m grateful for your enduring efforts to build a better, kinder, more compassionate world,” Bill Clinton said.

“The world is a troubled place, and we need your spirit of kindness and compassion and love more than ever,” George W Bush added.

Barack Obama wished a “very happy birthday to the youngest 90-year-old I know”.

“It is humbling to realise that you’ve been a leader on the world stage for longer than I’ve been alive,” Obama said, in his message to his “dear friend”.

“You’ve shown generations what it means to practise compassion, and speak up for freedom and dignity,” Obama added. “Not bad for someone who describes himself as a simple Buddhist monk.”

#### [2025-07-07 Is Trump tariff deal really a win for Vietnam – or a way of punishing China?](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/07/vietnam-trump-tariff-deal)

As news spread that Vietnam would become just the second nation to reach an initial tariff agreement with Washington, shares in the clothing companies and manufacturers that have a large footprint in the country rose with optimism.

Just hours later though, they declined sharply, as it became clear that the **devil** would be in the detail, and the most **striking** part of the deal might in fact be aimed at Vietnam’s powerful neighbour China.

Dodging the severe levy of 46% that was threatened in April, Vietnam is instead facing a tariff of 20% for many goods, and in return US products coming into the country will have zero tariffs placed on them.

However, a 40% tariff will remain for so-called **transshipments** – a **provision** that is aimed at Chinese companies accused of passing their products through Vietnam, or elsewhere, to avoid US tariffs.

Businesses worry that “transshipment” is a politicised term, and that if the US defines it too broadly, many goods could be unfairly targeted.

“Vietnam is a manufacturing hub – and as a hub you take inputs from other countries and make value-added stuff in Vietnam, and then export it to other countries,” says Dr Nguyen Khac Giang, visiting fellow at the ISEAS Yusof Ishak Institute.

It is unrealistic, he adds, to expect most Vietnamese goods, other than agricultural products, would be made entirely in Vietnam. What remains to be decided is: what proportion of a product should be?

How transshipments will be defined under the agreement – and how this policy will be enforced – remains to be seen, but it could have significant implications for global trade and tensions with China.

“One lesson for other countries is that the US intends to use these deals to apply pressure on China,” said Stephen Olson, a former US trade negotiator.

Vietnam, a booming manufacturing hub, benefited during the last Trump administration when punishing tariffs placed on China prompted many Chinese companies to shift their supply chains.

However, this caused the Vietnamese **trade surplus** with the US to surge, attracting US **ire** and allegations that Vietnam was wrongly acting as a **conduit** for Chinese companies wanting access to the US market.

China’s commerce ministry spokesperson He Yongqian responded to the US-Vietnam deal on Thursday stating: “We firmly oppose any party reaching a deal at the expense of China’s interests. If such a situation occurs, China will resolutely counter it to safeguard its legitimate rights and interests.”

Vietnam’s manufacturing industry is closely **intertwined** with both the US and China. US exports account for 30% of Vietnam’s GDP, while China is Vietnam’s top import source, relied on for raw materials used to make anything from **footwear** to furniture and electronics.

Vietnam is not alone in relying on China for such components, especially across electronic sectors. “China is completely **interwoven** into global supply chains,” says Dan Martin, international business adviser at Dezan Shira and Associates, based in Hanoi.

If companies are expected to prove the origin of all goods, this could place an unwelcome burden on those in sectors such as **textiles** where margins are low, says Martin.

However, he cautions that it remains to be seen whether the higher 40% tariff on transshipments will be actively enforced. It is also possible that Vietnam could benefit if US policy encourages suppliers to set up shop in Vietnam, Martin adds.

Businesses are largely pausing decisions until a clearer **picture** emerges, say analysts.

Policymakers in Hanoi remain on a diplomatic tightrope. Vietnam has long sought to balance relations with Washington and Beijing. It considers the US not only a key export market but a security partner that serves as a counterbalance to China’s **assertiveness**.

However, if Beijing considers that Hanoi is helping Washington constrain it, this risks **antagonising** Vietnam’s northern neighbour. It could lead to economic measures from China, or pressure over the disputed South China Sea, a major flashpoint in the region, says Peter Mumford, head of practice for south-east Asia at Eurasia Group.

As things stand, “aggressive retaliation” by Beijing against Hanoi is unlikely, he says: “Hanoi may even have given Beijing a rough indication of the steps it would have to take to secure a US trade deal.”

Vietnam has made efforts to show goodwill towards China over recent months, while also **courting** Trump.

In exchange for the 20% tariff rate, Trump said Vietnam would open up its market to US goods. US-made SUVs, “which do so well in the United States, will be a wonderful addition to the various product lines within Vietnam”, said Trump.

However the market for cars remains small in Vietnam, where city streets are famously **crammed** with millions of motorbikes.

#### [2025-07-07 China’s human rights lawyers speak out, 10 years after crackdown](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/07/chinas-human-rights-lawyers-speak-out-10-years-after-crackdown)

A decade on from China’s biggest crackdown on human rights lawyers in modern history, lawyers and activists say that the Chinese Communist party’s control over the legal **profession** has tightened, making rights defence work next to impossible.

The environment for human rights law has “steadily **regressed**, especially after the pandemic”, said Ren Quanniu, a **disbarred** human rights lawyer. “Right now, the rule of law in China – especially in terms of protecting human rights – has deteriorated to a point where it’s almost comparable to the Cultural Revolution era.” The Cultural Revolution was a decade of mass chaos unleashed by China’s former leader Mao Zedong in 1966. During that time judicial organs were attacked as “**bourgeois**” and the **nascent** court system was largely suspended.

Ren is one of hundreds of human rights lawyers to have been targeted since the “709 incident”, a nationwide crackdown on lawyers and activists that started on 9 July 2015. According to human rights groups and the US government, about 300 people from the loose collective of a **burgeoning** rights defence movement, known as weiquan, were targeted in the **round-up**. At least 10 were convicted of crimes such as “subversion of state power” and given jail terms, while dozens more have been subjected to **surveillance**, harassment and the revocation of their professional licences in the years since.

Modern China has never welcomed human rights lawyers. But in the relatively open years of the early 2000s, with the rise of the internet and China’s increasing desire for approval on the world stage, the space for civil society grew to a degree that is now almost unrecognisable. Lawyers scored wins for defendants in cases ranging from **tainted** baby milk formula scandals to the abuse of migrant workers.

“It’s hard to say we achieved success – we can only say that the services we provided have made it more difficult for the authorities to **persecute** certain groups,” said Jiang Tianyong, a 54-year-old former human rights lawyer known for taking on cases involving religious and ethnic minorities who served two years in prison for “inciting subversion of state power”.

But the nascent movement that Jiang was part of was suppressed soon after Xi Jinping, China’s leader, took power in 2012.

Although some weiquan lawyers were also interested in political reform, most were focused on working within the existing Chinese system. The **daily grind** was not about **promulgating** foreign ideas, said Ren. It was about defending ordinary citizens “based on the existing laws of China itself, the laws of the Chinese Communist party’s own legal system. Yet even within that framework, the lawyers were not allowed to help.”

Under Xi’s rule, activists have been rounded up, independent law firms and NGOs have been **reined** in, and any kind of organised activity outside the **auspices** of the Communist party (CCP) has been tightly restricted.

“The Chinese government under Xi Jinping has sought to **eradicate** the influence of lawyers who defend people’s rights,” said Maya Wang, associate China director at Human Rights Watch.

Ten years on from the crackdown, human rights workers say that the suppression of independent lawyers has become more systematic, and less visible, than rounding up individuals. Those affected by the 709 incident describe living under conditions of harassment and surveillance, and are often blocked from leaving the country. Jiang hasn’t seen his wife and daughter, who left China, in over a decade.

More broadly, lawyers working on cases that the CCP considers sensitive have been stripped of their professional credentials, while legal and political reforms have strengthened the role of the CCP in law firms.

Ren escaped the first wave of **reprisals** after the 709 incident. For a few years, he tried to keep on taking up sensitive cases, including that of Zhang Zhan, the citizen journalist who was jailed after reporting from Wuhan on the early days on the Covid-19 pandemic.

In 2021, his licence was revoked.

According to data gathered by Chinese Human Rights Defenders, a US-based NGO, between 2017 and 2019, there were 29 cases of law firms or lawyers having their licences revoked or suspended, compared with nine cases between 2014 and 2016.

At the same time, China has expanded the provision of legal aid, which the government says will “benefit more people in need”. According to a Chinese study published in 2022, 60% of defendants with legal representation would receive government-sponsored legal aid. But the legal aid law states that its aim is to “uphold the leadership of the Chinese Communist party” and critics say that the changes, which include the insertion of Xi Jinping Thought into the charter of the All-China Lawyers Association, have narrowed the space for independent lawyers.

“The Chinese government has been increasing ideological control throughout the legal profession while also increasing the provision of public legal services, and at the same time requiring those legal services be provided by lawyers who are loyal to the party,” said Wang.

Many of China’s human rights lawyers say their work has been pushed underground. Those without licences try to offer **informal** advice to people in need, but their ability is severely limited.

Under these conditions, “no one is truly safe,” said Xie Yanyi, a lawyer detained in the 709 crackdown. “Human rights belong to everyone, and the rule of law protects everyone.”

Still, Xie remains hopeful for the future. “Although the year of the 709 incident marked a major regression in the rule of law in China … people, I believe, are gradually building resilience, **maturing** and becoming stronger.”

China’s Ministry of Justice and Public Security Bureau did not respond to a request for comment.

#### [2025-07-08 Ukraine war briefing: US to resume shipments of weapons for Ukrainian defence](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/08/ukraine-war-briefing-sanctions-over-russian-chemical-weapons-on-battlefield)

Donald Trump said on Monday that the US would resume shipments of “defensive weapons, primarily” to Ukraine in a **reversal** of an only days-old decision to withhold their supply. Answering a reporter’s question at the White House, the US president said: “We’re going to send some more weapons. We have to. They have to be able to defend themselves. They’re getting hit very hard now.”

The Pentagon under Pete Hegseth last week halted already funded and promised arms shipments to Ukraine, with the defence secretary and Trump administration officials giving varying reasons – ranging from a seriously questioned claim by Hegseth of low weapons stocks, to the pause being part of a standard review of defence capabilities.

Soon after Trump spoke on Monday, the Pentagon released a statement. “At President Trump’s direction, the department of defence is sending additional defensive weapons to Ukraine to ensure the Ukrainians can defend themselves while we work to secure a lasting peace and ensure the killing stops. Our framework for Potus to evaluate military shipments across the globe remains in effect and is **integral** to our America First defence priorities.”

Britain on Monday placed sanctions on two Russian individuals and one Russian entity for the transfer and use of chemical weapons in Ukraine. It imposed asset freezes and travel bans on Aleksey Viktorovich Rtishchev and Andrei Marchenko, the head and deputy head of Russia’s **radiological** chemical and biological defence troops. The Joint Stock Company Federal Scientific and Production Centre Scientific Research Institute of Applied Chemistry was sanctioned for supplying the Russian military with RG-Vo **riot** control **grenades** whose use in warfare **contravenes** the international chemical weapons convention.

At least one person was killed and 71 were wounded in Russian drone strikes on Ukraine’s second biggest city, Kharkiv, officials said on Monday. **Apartment** buildings, a kindergarten and the regional **draft** office were damaged in two waves of strikes, local and military officials said. During the second wave, six Shahed drones struck within 10 minutes, aimed “at residential streets, at cars, at people”, said the Kharkiv mayor, Ihor Terekhov.

In south-eastern Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia city at least 20 people were wounded and dozens of residential buildings and a university building damaged in a morning drone strike, governor Ivan Fedorov said on Monday. One person was killed in Odesa, regional officials said.

Russia struck two military recruitment centres in drone attacks on Monday, Ukraine’s military said. The attacks hit densely populated areas, in Kharkiv and Zaporizhzhia, damaging draft offices as well as wounding dozens of civilians, and came a day after a Russian drone struck a recruitment centre in Kremenchuk. Last week, Russian attacks targeted draft offices in Poltava, another regional capital, as well as Kryvyi Rih.

Ukraine’s national security and defence council said Russia was waging an “information campaign” on social media about draft office locations “to destabilise the mobilisation process and sow panic among the population”; however a ground forces spokesperson said recruitment remained on track.

Ukraine’s military said it struck a chemical plant in Russia’s Moscow region that manufactures explosives, ammunition and **thermobaric** warheads for Shahed attack drones. “A series of explosions were recorded in the area of the city of Krasnozavodsk and the movement of fire trucks in neighbouring settlements,” the military general staff announced on Monday.

Ukraine’s drones also hit workshops at the Ilsky oil refinery in Russia’s Krasnodar region, causing a fire and **disrupting production**, according to a Ukrainian security service source cited in national media. The BBC said it confirmed the information with its own security source, and Russian local officials confirmed the Krasnodar attack.

The former deputy chief of the Russian army’s general staff was sentenced to 17 years in prison on Monday over a scheme involving theft of money from defence ministry contracts, the Tass news agency of Russia reported. Khalil Arslanov, a **colonel** general, and others were found guilty of stealing 1.6bn roubles (£14.9m/US$20.3m) from state contracts with Voentelecom, which provides telecommunications services and equipment to the Russian military.

#### [2025-07-09 Ukraine war briefing: US weapons supply pause ‘caught Trump off guard’](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/09/ukraine-war-briefing-us-weapons-supply-pause-caught-trump-off-guard)

Donald Trump was reportedly caught **off guard** by the Pentagon’s **abrupt** move to pause Ukraine weapons deliveries, which the president has overturned. The Associated Press cited three people familiar with the matter, one of whom described Trump as being caught “**flat footed**” by last week’s announcement. A Pentagon spokesperson denied that the defence secretary, Pete Hegseth, had acted without consulting the president. But asked by a reporter on Tuesday who had approved the pause, Trump **bristled** at the question while he was gathered with his Cabinet. “I don’t know. Why don’t you tell me?”

Trump on Tuesday voiced his frustration with Vladimir Putin and promised to send Ukraine 10 Patriot missiles, which are claimed to be in short supply. Speaking at a cabinet meeting on Tuesday, Trump said he was getting increasingly **frustrated** with the Russian leader. “We get a lot of bullshit thrown at us by Putin, if you want to know the truth. He’s very nice all the time, but it turns out to be meaningless.”

Asked if he wanted to see further sanctions against Russia, Trump replied: “I’m looking at it.” On Monday he said he was “disappointed” with Russia’s president and would send “more weapons” to Ukraine, reversing the Pentagon’s pause.

Russian authorities claimed a Ukrainian drone attack on a beach in Kursk city killed three people, including a Russian **serviceman** and injured seven. Alexander Khinshtein, the acting regional governor, claimed the Russian national guard member had been trying to evacuate people from the scene because of a drone attack. Khinshtein also claimed a Ukrainian drone hit a hospital in the Kursk oblast town of Rylsk, injuring two people, blowing out windows and setting a roof on fire. There was no independent confirmation and throughout the war Ukraine has denied targeting civilians, with its strikes inside Russia focused on military facilities and personnel, individual senior commanders, and strategic national infrastructure such as fuel **depots** and refineries.

Russia’s Federal Security Service (FSB) will be allowed to set up its own pre-trial detention centres under a bill passed by the lower house of parliament. The power was previously abolished with the demise of the Soviet-era KGB. Lawmakers say its revival is a response to a spike in the intelligence and **subversive** activities of foreign powers since Russia started the war.

A group of men have been convicted over an **arson** attack ordered by the banned Russian terrorist group Wagner on an east London warehouse used to supply humanitarian aid and StarLink satellite equipment to Ukraine. They went on to plot more arson attacks in London’s Mayfair district and the kidnap of a Russian dissident but were ultimately unsuccessful. Old Bailey judge Mrs Justice Cheema-Grubb said the convicted men would be sentenced on a date to be fixed in the autumn.

#### [2025-07-09 Gaza aid workers overwhelmed by ‘mass casualty incidents’ at food distribution sites](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/09/gaza-aid-workers-overwhelmed-by-mass-casualty-incidents-at-food-distribution-sites)

Medical officials, humanitarian workers and doctors in Gaza say they have been **overwhelmed** by almost daily “mass casualty incidents” as they struggle to deal with those wounded by Israeli fire on Palestinians seeking aid.

Doctors said many of the casualties they are treating describe being shot as they try to reach distribution sites run by the Gaza Humanitarian Foundation (GHF), a secretive US- and Israel-backed organisation that began handing out food in late May.

Others have been injured as huge crowds form around **convoys** sent into Gaza by the UN, many of which are stopped and **looted**.

Dr Mohammed Saqr, director of nursing at Gaza’s Nasser Medical Complex in Khan Younis, said he had personally witnessed countless mass casualty incidents in recent weeks.

“The scenes are truly shocking – they **resemble** the horrors of judgment day. Sometimes within just half an hour we receive over 100 to 150 cases, ranging from severe injuries to deaths … About 95% of these injuries and deaths come from food distribution centres – what are referred to as the ‘American food distribution centres’,” Saqr said.

The casualties among those seeking aid – which totalled 640 killed and more than 4,500 injured between 27 May and 2 July, according to the Ministry of Health in Gaza – have strained a system that is already close to collapse.

“Every bed is occupied by a patient, and these additional injuries place an unimaginable burden on us. We are forced to treat patients on the floor of the emergency department … Most of these injuries are gunshot wounds to the chest and head … Patients are arriving with **amputated** legs and arms,” Saqr told the Guardian.

The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) said on Tuesday its doctors in Gaza had seen a sharp surge over the past month in mass casualty incidents linked to aid distribution sites.

Since the launch of the new aid distribution system, which Israel insists is necessary to prevent Hamas **diverting** humanitarian assistance, the ICRC’s 60-bed field hospital in Rafah, in the south of Gaza, has treated more than 2,200 weapon-wounded patients and has registered more than 200 deaths.

“The scale and frequency of these incidents are without precedent. In just over a month, the number of patients treated has surpassed the total seen in all mass casualty events during the entire previous year,” the ICRC said in a statement.

“Among the wounded are toddlers, teenagers, elderly, mothers – and **overwhelmingly**, young men and boys. Most say they were simply trying to get food or aid for their families.”

An 86-bed field hospital run by UK-Med in al-Mawasi, on the coast of southern Gaza, has also received many casualties who were seeking aid when they were hurt.

“Since I arrived there have been a lot of gunshot injuries. They tell me how they were injured, and say it was at or near food distribution sites,” said Dr Clare Jeffrys, a British emergency medicine specialist who is working at the hospital.

One patient with severe **abdominal** wounds told Jeffrys he had been injured as he picked up a box of food at a distribution site.

There was no independent confirmation of the claim and the GHF has **strenuously** denied that any injuries were inflicted at any of its sites, blaming Israeli troops firing on Palestinians who are trying to reach the four hubs they have established in southern and central Gaza.

It said in a statement: “To date, there have been no incidents or fatalities at or in the immediate **vicinity** of any of our distribution sites during our operating hours.”

The organisation said this week it has distributed 62m meals in the territory and was “working **tirelessly** to distribute free food aid directly to the people of Gaza safely and without interference”.

The Israeli military has repeatedly said it does not target civilians, takes all **feasible** **precautions** to avoid harm to non-combatants and **abides** by international law.

But after a report in the newspaper Haaretz, which quoted soldiers describing orders to fire on civilians seeking aid, Israel’s military said it was reviewing its operations around aid distribution sites.

Jeffrys said the UK-Med hospital was also suffering from acute shortages of basic supplies.

“We are really struggling … We are running out of external **fixators**, which are vital for treating open **fractures**, and critical medicines including pain killers, antibiotics and **anaesthetics**. For some things, there is just zero stock,” she said.

The healthcare system in Gaza has been **decimated** during the 21-month conflict, which was triggered in October 2023 when Hamas militants launched a surprise attack into Israel, killing 1,200, mostly civilians, and taking 250 hostages.

In the **ensuing** offensive that Israel launched into Gaza, more than 57,000 Palestinians have been killed, mostly civilians, and much of the territory reduced to rubble.

Nearly half of the territory’s 36 hospitals have been put out of service and the remaining facilities are operating at a **fraction** of their usual capacity. All struggle with acute shortages of essential medical supplies and basic equipment such as **respirators**, X-ray machines, scanners or even lamps for operating theatres.

“Staff are racing to treat an unrelenting tide of injuries, the vast majority caused by gunfire … which has overwhelmed Gaza’s shattered healthcare system, pushing its already-diminished capacity past its limit,” the ICRC said.

Shortages are now more **acute** than since the beginning of the war, medics told the Guardian, with a lack of fuel, which runs generators that provide almost all power, threatening an almost total shutdown of all medical services.

For 11 weeks, Israel blocked all food, medicine and other supplies from entering Gaza, accusing Hamas of diverting aid to fund its military and other activities, though the UN said its monitoring systems were robust. Since mid-May, Israel has allowed in a **trickle** of aid, including medical supplies.

“In the previous rotations, we would work in the operating theatre on between eight and 10 cases. Right now, we are working on 30-40 cases per day,” said Haitam al-Hasan, an operating theatre nurse at the ICRC’s Rafah hospital.

“We have people screaming, rushing, trying to be the first in the line because, of course, everybody wants to be treated first. We have a variety of injuries, mostly complex injuries, blast injuries, but mainly gunshot injuries.”

According to the Gaza Health Ministry, 1,580 doctors and medical personnel have been killed in the conflict.

On 2 July, an Israeli airstrike killed Dr Marwan al-Sultan, a **renowned** and highly experienced **cardiologist** and director of the Indonesian hospital in Gaza.

Among the healthcare workers killed in the past 50 days were three other doctors, the chief nurses of the Indonesian hospital and al-Nasser children’s hospital, one of Gaza’s most senior **midwives**, a senior radiology technician and dozens of young medical graduates and **trainee** nurses.

#### [2025-07-10 Ukraine war briefing: Two Chinese nationals arrested in Neptune missile espionage case](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/10/ukraine-war-briefing-two-chinese-under-arrest-in-neptune-missile-espionage-case)

Ukraine said it had arrested a Chinese father and son, both suspected of spying on Kyiv’s **Neptune** cruise missile programme. Counterintelligence officials detained a 24-year-old former student in Kyiv after they provided him with “technical documentation” related to Neptune production, Ukraine’s SBU said. They later **swooped** on his father when he visited Ukraine from China to “personally coordinate” his son’s work and smuggle out the documents to the Chinese special services, the SBU said.

A Ukrainian official told Reuters the two men were the first Chinese people arrested for spying since Moscow’s 2022 full-scale invasion. Kyiv has repeatedly accused China of supplying parts and technologies central to the Russian drone and missile programme. China’s government insists there has been no such trade. The Chinese embassy in Kyiv did not respond to a request for comment from Reuters on the Neptune case and a lawyer for the men could not immediately be found.

The US resumed delivering artillery shells and mobile rocket artillery missiles to Ukraine, US officials told Reuters and the Associated Press on Wednesday, on the instructions of Donald Trump who claimed he did not know who ordered the shipments’ suspension last week. The officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, said 155mm artillery shells and GMLRS (mobile rocket artillery) missiles were being provided. The shipment paused last week included 30 Patriot missiles, 8,500 155mm artillery shells, more than 250 **precision** GMLRS missiles and 142 Hellfire air-to-surface missiles.

Kyiv was again under bombardment early on Thursday morning. As air defences fought off Russian drones, one struck an apartment building in the centre of the capital, said Tymur Tkachenko, head of the Kyiv military administration, and debris fell in different districts of the city. Reuters witnesses reported loud explosions.

On Wednesday, Russia **pummelled** Ukraine with its largest missile and drone attack in more than three years of war – a dark record that is seemingly reset higher every few days. Lutsk, a town in western Ukraine, was heavily targeted for its military airfield and infrastructure. Kyiv’s air force said Russia fired 728 drones and 13 missiles at Ukraine, with air defence systems cutting down 711 drones and seven missiles. Air force representatives said new Ukrainian drones played an important role in defending against the attacks and most of the Russian drones were **decoys**.

A one-year-old boy was killed in a Russian attack on the village of Pravdyne in the southern Kherson region, local officials announced. Some reports said he was hit by a drone in his back yard along with his grandmother who was badly injured. Ukrainian prosecutors said Russian drone and bombing attacks in two towns in Donetsk killed eight civilians on Wednesday. Officials published images showing the remains of two people burnt to death in their car, which officials said was hit by a Russian drone.

Casualties included three people killed and one injured in the frontline town of Kostiantynivka in Donetsk region, the national emergency services said. A one-**storey** administrative building was destroyed and rescue teams pulled bodies out of the rubble. Firefighters **extinguished** blazes in four buildings. Vadym Filashkin, governor of Donetsk oblast, said it was time to “take a responsible decision. Evacuate to less dangerous regions of Ukraine!”

Volodymyr Zelenskyy and Keith Kellogg had a “**substantive**” conversation, the Ukrainian president said after meeting the US president’s Ukraine envoy in Rome. “We discussed weapons supplies and strengthening air defence … We also covered the purchase of American weapons, joint defence manufacturing, and **localisation** efforts in Ukraine.” Both men were in Italy ahead of a conference on 10-11 July dedicated to Ukraine’s recovery and long-term reconstruction.

Zelenskyy said he and Kellogg had discussed at length proposals to slap tougher sanctions on Moscow. He expressed hope for progress in a sanctions bill before the US Congress, sponsored by Republican Lindsey Graham of South Carolina and Democrat Richard Blumenthal of Connecticut. Donald Trump has been aiming unusually direct criticism at Vladimir Putin, saying the Russian ruler’s statements on moving towards peace were “meaningless” and “bullshit”.

The Guardian’s diplomatic editor, Patrick Wintour, considers whether the Trump-Putin bromance may have run its course. “If so it is a **transformatory** moment, and a **vindication** for both Volodymyr Zelenskyy as he arrives in Rome for the annual Ukraine reconstruction conference and for those others, notably the British and the French governments, who have patiently helped the scales to fall from Trump’s eyes about Putin’s true intentions. At long last and after many false starts, the US president seems to have accepted he is unpersuadable on ending the war.

Europe’s top human rights court delivered **damning** judgments on Wednesday against Russia in four cases brought by Kyiv and the Netherlands. Judges at the European court of human rights ruled that Russia committed a string of human rights violations in backing anti-Kyiv separatists in eastern Ukraine from 2014, in the downing of the MH17 flight that year and in invading Ukraine in 2022. Russia violated the convention through “**extrajudicial** killing of civilians and Ukrainian military personnel” outside of combat, “**torture**”, “forced labour”, “unlawful and arbitrary detention of civilians” as well as looting in its invasion of Ukraine, the judges found.

#### [2025-07-10 Russian attack on Kyiv leaves two dead a day after largest assault of war](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/10/russia-largest-missile-drone-attack-kyiv-ukraine-war)

A huge wave of Russian strikes on Ukraine’s capital killed two people and left more wounded, Kyiv’s military administration said early on Thursday, with reports of loud blasts echoing over the city throughout the night.

The administration warned of a threat from drones and ballistic weapons and told all residents to “immediately head to the nearest shelters”. Dozens of residents of the capital took shelter in a central metro station during the attack, an Agence France-Presse reporter said, sleeping on **mats**, calming pets or waiting out the attack on **camping** furniture.

Kyiv’s mayor, Vitali Klitschko, said falling debris sparked fires at buildings in the districts of Solomyansky and Shevchenkivsky. Falling drone debris also caused fires at **garages** and a gas station in another capital district, Darnytsky.

The latest Russian assault comes a day after Moscow pummelled Ukraine with its largest missile and drone attack in more than three years of war, killing at least one civilian.

Russia’s record barrage points to a trend of escalating attacks that have piled pressure on Ukraine’s **thinly stretched** air defence capabilities and exhausted civilian population.

The US secretary of state, Marco Rubio, is to meet with the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, on the sidelines of the Asean foreign ministers’ meeting in Kuala Lumpur on Thursday.

It will be the second in-person meeting between Rubio and Lavrov and comes at a time when the US president, Donald Trump, has grown increasingly frustrated with Vladimir Putin, the Russian president, as the war in Ukraine drags on.

Trump, who returned to power this year promising a swift end to the war that began in 2022, had taken a more **conciliatory** tone towards Moscow in a **departure** from predecessor Joe Biden’s staunch support for Kyiv.

But after the US resumed some shipments of defensive weapons to Ukraine after a pause, Trump aimed unusually direct criticism at Putin, saying the Kremlin leader’s statements on moving towards peace were “meaningless”.

Trump has also said he was considering supporting a bill that would impose steep sanctions on Russia, including 500% tariffs on nations that buy Russian oil, gas, uranium and other exports.

When asked on Wednesday about Trump’s criticism of Putin, the Kremlin said Moscow was “calm” regarding the criticism and that it would continue to try to fix a “broken” US-Russia relationship.

At a conference of Ukraine-friendly nations in Rome on Wednesday, Trump’s Ukraine envoy, Keith Kellogg, met the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, in what Kyiv described as a “substantive” conversation.

#### [2025-07-11 Ukraine war briefing: Trump poised to send weapons under Biden-style drawdown, say sources](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/11/ukraine-war-briefing-trump-poised-to-send-weapons-under-biden-style-drawdown-say-sources)

Donald Trump may be preparing to send weapons to Ukraine using presidential **drawdown** authority (PDA) – a **discretion** that his predecessor, Joe Biden, used to urgently arm Kyiv’s forces. Sources told Reuters that Trump’s team would identify arms from US stockpiles to send to Ukraine under the PDA, with one saying the **tranche** could be worth about $300m. The president has $3.86bn worth of PDA for Ukraine remaining – the last drawdown was $500m by Biden on 9 January.

Trump this week said the US would send weapons to help Ukraine defend itself against intensifying Russian advances – a pointed reversal after the Pentagon under Pete Hegseth had tried to put US weapons supply to the Ukrainians on hold. Much of what Biden sent using PDA was surplus equipment in US reserve stockpiles that was due for replacement or to be scrapped – a fact that **rebuts** the argument that arming Ukraine leaves the US short of weaponry for its own purposes. Ukraine’s top priorities are Patriot missile interceptors and GMLRS mobile rocket artillery, which may be included in the package. The weapons could be on the frontlines within days because stocks are positioned in Europe.

Ukraine again succeeded in shutting down Moscow airports as it launched drones at the Russian capital. Three airports in the Moscow area – Domodedovo, Vnukovo and Zhukovsky – suspended operations temporarily on Thursday, Russia’s **aviation authority** Rosaviatsiya said. Some closures were continuing on Friday morning, reports said. The authority also said it had to temporarily halt flights at Kaluga airport, about 200km (125 miles) south-west of Moscow.

A senior Ukrainian security officer was shot dead in a residential parking **lot** in Kyiv on Thursday before the killer fled on foot. Police said they were working to identify and detain the shooter. The agent was a colonel in the Security Service of Ukraine (SBU), an official told Reuters. The SBU, a **sprawling** domestic spy agency with thousands of staff, said it had opened a criminal investigation into the murder of one of its employees in Kyiv’s southern Holosiivskyi district.

Volodymyr Zelenskyy said on Thursday that he would replace Ukraine’s ambassador to the US and was considering his defence minister, Rustem Umerov, for the post. Ukraine’s president said the main task would be to strengthen Ukraine in its defence efforts in the war against Russia and Umerov was a key figure to do that.

Zelenskyy urged Ukraine’s allies to speed up imposing new sanctions on Russia, Luke Harding writes, after another huge wave of strikes on his country’s capital killed two people, including a police officer, and left dozens more wounded. Russian strikes on Kupiansk in the Kharkiv region left two dead and five injured, said prosecutors.

Zelenskyy said he had discussed improved air defences and intensified sanctions against Russia with two US lawmakers who are backing a bill to impose tougher punitive measures against Moscow. “Right now, our priority is strengthening air defences. Russia wants to move on to using 1,000 drones in the space of a single attack.” Ukraine was ready to work together with Europe to buy “large US defence packages to protect lives”.

Marco Rubio, Trump’s secretary of state, meanwhile said there were no signs that the Kremlin was willing to compromise. Speaking after talks with Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, in Kuala Lumpur, Rubio said Donald Trump was disappointed with Moscow’s hardline stance, and sanctions on Russia were a real option, with the Trump administration engaging with the Senate and Congress over the sanctions bill.

A Russian military drone flew into Lithuania and crashed, Lithuanian authorities confirmed on Thursday. Dovilė Šakalienė, the Balkan country’s defence minister, said it was a Gerbera decoy drone intended to **imitate** the armed Shahed drones. Russia uses Gerberas to **tie up** Ukrainian air defences during its Shahed attacks. The Lithuania incident is the latest apparent incursion by Russian aircraft into Nato airspace during the war.

Russian authorities have **confiscated** western assets worth about \$50bn over the past three years, research showed on Wednesday. While that includes property of companies like beer maker Carlsberg, the west is holding an estimated \$355bn in frozen Russian financial assets that several of Kyiv’s allies say could be spent on Ukraine’s defence and reconstruction. In February the UK foreign secretary, David Lammy, told parliament that he believed Europe “should move from freezing assets to seizing assets” from Russia for Ukraine’s benefit.

Countries prepared to provide troops for a post-ceasefire force in Ukraine have agreed to set up a headquarters in Paris. A US delegation was present for the first time at a meeting of the group on Thursday that took place on the sidelines of the fourth annual conference on Ukraine’s recovery held in Rome. Emmanuel Macron, the French president, and the British PM, Keir Starmer, joined the meeting via videoconference.

#### [2025-07-11 North Korean defector to sue Kim Jong-un alleging torture and sexual violence in regime’s detention facilities](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/11/north-korea-defector-to-sue-kim-jong-un)

A North Korean defector has filed a lawsuit against Kim Jong-un in a South Korean court, **alleging** torture and sexual violence in the regime’s detention facilities.

Choi Min-kyung, 53, is seeking 50m won (US$37,000) in damages from the North Korean state represented by its leader, Kim Jong-un, and six other officials. She also submitted a criminal complaint asking prosecutors to investigate crimes against humanity charges against Kim and five other officials.

The filings at Seoul’s central district court and prosecutors’ office on Friday will represent what supporters say is the first time a North Korean defector has pursued legal action for the regime’s human rights violations in South Korean courts.

“It’s been 13 years since I settled in South Korea but I still suffer from severe PTSD from torture aftereffects and live dependent on medication,” Choi told the Guardian. “The scars on my entire body testify to the horrific reality of North Korean human rights.”

Choi escaped North Korea in 1997 but was forcibly repatriated from China four times between 2000 and 2008. During her final repatriation in 2008, she spent five months detained across three facilities in North Hamgyong province.

The complaints – seen by the Guardian – detail specific alleged incidents, including sexual assault during an **unsanitary** body **cavity** search without gloves, severe beatings that burst her right **eardrum** and left her unconscious, and systematic torture through forced stress positions lasting more than 15 hours daily.

Among Choi’s lawyers is Lee Young-hyun, himself a North Korean defector who became the first North Korean-born lawyer qualified to practise in South Korea.

The Database Centre for North Korean Human Rights (NKDB), which supported the case, plans to use it as a foundation for **submissions** to UN human rights bodies and the international criminal court.

“This case may serve as a **precedent-setting** moment in South Korean **jurisprudence**, as domestic courts have had little prior case law dealing with crimes against humanity,” said Seongyeop Lee, a human rights analyst at NKDB.

“As other victims have also expressed interest in legal action, this case could lay the foundation for future collective lawsuits and contribute to broader **accountability** efforts.”

Both filings name Kim Jong-un as a defendant bearing responsibility for the alleged abuses. The criminal complaint argues he has command responsibility for systematic crimes against humanity under the principle that North Korean officials operate under the supreme leader’s “effective control”.

The complaint draws heavily on the 2014 UN commission of **inquiry** that found North Korea committed widespread crimes against humanity, including torture, sexual violence and arbitrary detention. The report documented systemic abuses in the country’s network of political prison camps, estimated to hold between 80,000 and 120,000 people.

Previous civil lawsuits against North Korea include cases by former prisoners of war seeking compensation for forced labour, families of South Koreans abducted during the Korean war, and a 2023 case seeking damages for North Korea’s destruction of an inter-Korean **liaison** office.

In theory, South Korean courts can hear such cases because the country’s constitution considers North Korea part of Korean territory, rather than a separate sovereign state.

The civil complaint lists North Korea’s UN mission in New York as the service address, since direct service to Pyongyang institutions is impossible.

However, enforcement remains impossible as there is no mechanism to compel North Korea to pay damages even when **plaintiffs** win, making such victories largely symbolic.

Joanna Hosaniak of the Citizens’ Alliance for North Korean Human Rights cautioned that crimes against humanity cases typically required multiple victims and extensive evidence of systematic patterns.

“These are hugely complex legal proceedings that usually take years to build properly,” she said.

But Choi remains undeterred. “We must act while survivors are still alive to testify,” she said.

“This small step must become a cornerstone for freedom and human rights, so no more innocent North Koreans suffer under this brutal regime.

“We are the living witnesses.”

#### [2025-07-13 Ukraine war briefing: Kim Jong-un voices ‘unconditional’ support for Moscow as Russian foreign minister visits](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/13/ukraine-war-briefing-kim-jong-un-voices-unconditional-support-for-moscow-as-russian-foreign-minister-visits)

North Korea’s leader Kim Jong-un has reaffirmed his full support for Moscow in the war in Ukraine during talks with Russia’s top diplomat, state media reported on Sunday. The Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, is on a three-day visit to North Korea, the latest in a series of trips by top Moscow officials as the two countries deepen military and political ties. Kim and Lavrov met on Saturday in “an atmosphere full of warm comradely trust”, North Korea’s official KCNA news agency reported. Kim told Lavrov that North Korea was “ready to unconditionally support and **encourage** all the measures taken by the Russian leadership as regards the tackling of the root cause of the Ukrainian crisis”.

Lavrov spoke to reporters at North Korea’s eastern city of Wonsan, where he met Kim and North Korea’s foreign minister Choe Son Hui, issuing a joint statement pledging support to safeguard the territorial integrity of each other’s countries, KCNA said. A massive resort was opened in Wonson earlier this month. Ahead of Lavrov’s visit, Russia announced that it would begin twice-a-week flights between Moscow and Pyongyang. Lavrov **lauded** Wonsan as “a good tourist attraction”, adding: “We hope it will be popular not only with local citizens, but also with Russians.”

Lavrov also warned the US, South Korea and Japan against forming a security partnership targeting North Korea, accusing the countries of what he called military **buildups** around North Korea. “We warn against exploiting these ties to build alliances directed against anyone, including North Korea and, of course, Russia,” he said, according to Russia’s state Tass news agency. The deepening relationship between Russia and North Korea has raised concerns among South Korea and the US that Russia might also transfer to North Korea sensitive technologies that can increase the danger of its nuclear and missile programmes. Lavrov said Russia understood North Korea’s decision to seek nuclear weapons. “The technologies used by North Korea are the result of the work of its own scientists. We respect North Korea’s **aspirations** and understand the reasons why it is pursuing nuclear development,” Lavrov said, according to Tass.

Russia fired hundreds of drones and long-range missiles across Ukraine overnight, killing at least six people in its latest wave of strikes, Ukraine said on Saturday. “The Russians continue to use their specific tactics of terror against our country, striking **concentrated** blows at one city or another, at one region or another,” the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, said in his evening address. Moscow has stepped up aerial strikes over recent months as US-led ceasefire talks have stalled. “Twenty-six cruise missiles and 597 attack drones were launched, of which more than half were ‘Shaheds’,” Zelenskyy said, referring to Iranian-made drones. The Ukrainian air force said it had downed 319 Shahed drones and 25 missiles, adding that one missile and about 20 drones had hit “five locations”.

Zelenskyy said the strikes had killed at least two people and wounded 20 in the south-western Chernivtsi region, far from the frontlines of the east and south. Twelve people were wounded in Lviv, also in the west, while in the east two people died in Dnipropetrovsk and three were wounded in Kharkiv, officials said. Zelenskyy said that some of the drones sent by Russia had been “**simulators**” intended to “overload the air-defence system and make it more difficult to shoot down the ‘suicide drones’. This is their deliberate and **despicable** terror.” The Russian defence ministry said it had targeted companies in Ukraine’s military-industrial complex in Lviv, Kharkiv and Lutsk and a military **aerodrome**.

In a video message, Zelenskyy said “we are close to reaching a multi-level agreement on new Patriot systems and missiles for them”. Ukraine was stepping up production of its own interceptor systems, he added. The US special envoy Keith Kellogg is due to begin his latest visit to Ukraine on Monday as a Washington-led peace effort **flounders**. Donald Trump also said he would make a “major statement … on Russia” on Monday. On Friday, the Kremlin restated its opposition to a European peacekeeping force in Ukraine, after French President Emmanuel Macron said Kyiv’s allies had a plan “ready to go … in the hours after a ceasefire”.

Zelenskyy urged his western allies to send “more than just signals” to stop the war launched by Russia in February 2022. “The pace of Russian airstrikes requires swift decisions and it can be curbed right now through sanctions,” he said on social media. Zelenskyy specifically demanded penalties for those who “help Russia produce drones and profit from oil”.

#### [2025-07-14 Caught in the contest between China and the west, the Cook Islands asks where its future lies](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/14/caught-in-the-contest-between-china-and-the-west-the-cook-islands-asks-where-its-future-lies)

On a remote stretch of land in the Cook Islands lies a second world war **airstrip**. Once used as a wartime supply route by American forces, the narrow runway is in **dire** need of **resealing** to allow larger tourist jets to land. Leaders on the northern island of Penrhyn have asked New Zealand, Australia and the US to help, but none have come through. Now, they hope China will step in and fund it.

“That is the dream,” says Penrhyn’s executive director, Puna John Vano. “We want to maintain our traditional partners, but if not, we’re going to get assistance from elsewhere.”

Funding for the airstrip is a symbol of a wider struggle unfolding in the Cook Islands, a new front in the contest between China and the west in the Pacific. The country of about 17,000 people has seen ties with its biggest ally and former colonial partner New Zealand **fray** as leaders draw it closer to Beijing.

The Cook Islands struck major deals with China earlier this year for economic and other kinds of cooperation, sparking a diplomatic row with Wellington over a lack of consultation.

Cook Islands operates in “free association” New Zealand and while it governs its own affairs, Wellington provides assistance including in foreign affairs and defence. Tensions escalated and last month New Zealand abruptly cut off millions of dollars in critical aid and funding.

Now, the path ahead is unclear. On the country’s main island, Rarotonga, many are angry over the damage caused to relations with New Zealand. Some welcome more Chinese investment but others raise questions over what it will bring. The Cook Islands prime minister, Mark Brown, and his government declined requests for an interview. But others, such as the opposition leader, Tina Browne, were **vocal** in their criticism of Beijing building its influence in the Cook Islands.

“China frightens me. Its involvement with my country scares me a bit,” Browne says. “You have this big power and small, small us. What sort of voice would we have?”

Rarotonga is a tourism hub and home to nearly three-quarters of the Cook Islands’ population. The place is small enough to circle by motorbike in under an hour. In the sleepy seaside town, one of the main attractions is standing at the **seawall** to watch planes land.

Many here share Browne’s concerns over China, particularly as it begins to put pressure on the country’s longstanding ties with New Zealand. This relationship is overwhelmingly popular – its citizens hold New Zealand citizenship. Cook Islanders have access to healthcare and employment opportunities in New Zealand.

Fruit and vegetable seller Teremoana Napa spent 40 years living and working in New Zealand before returning to the Cook Islands. She is now on New Zealand’s **pension**.

“The New Zealand passport gives us so much,” she says. “We don’t want a Cook Islands passport, that’s a **bloody** **dead-end** passport.”

Others share concern over the loss of crucial aid from Wellington. Outside the country’s main hospital, Calais Ngatan helps his heavily **pregnant** wife to the car. The young man fears what New Zealand’s funding cuts will mean for the islands’ already stretched healthcare system. New Zealand’s NZ$18.2m budget support – which is tied up in the freeze – supports education, healthcare and other critical services.

“Our government decided to sign a contract with China,” Ngatan says. “So it’s limiting our resources over here.” He says he “feels robbed” by China “taking everything from us”.

“If we cut ties with New Zealand, it also cuts ties with all the tourists that are coming from overseas,” he says. “That will be a big problem for us, because that’s how we survive.”

On Rarotonga, many people hold two jobs to make ends meet in an economy heavily influenced by outside forces: tourism demands, weather-affected fishing revenues and the rising cost of imported goods.

The deal signed in February between the Cook Islands and China **encompasses** a series of cooperation agreements designed to support the domestic economy. They include more cooperation in trade, tourism, infrastructure, climate resilience and seabed minerals development. They also signalled closer diplomatic cooperation, with pledges to consult and support one another in multilateral forums, including the UN and the Pacific Islands Forum. The documents did not include references to security or military cooperation.

China has already pledged $US1.5m to the Cook Islands for a new shipping vessel and promised to support renewable energy projects.

The controversial practice of seabed mining is a key part of China’s deals with the Cook Islands. The Pacific nation is one of the first countries in the world to grant exploration licences for deep-sea mineral exploration, a practice that has drawn criticism from others in the region.

Anna Powles, associate professor at Massey University’s centre for defence and security studies, says deep-sea mining is crucial to China’s interest in the Cook Islands. The two countries have agreed to collaborate on scientific research, joint **expeditions**, education and training. Powles says there is a “race” for critical minerals for their defence application and for that reason China is “actively engaged in finding opportunities and **formalising** partnerships with countries who are interested in mining their deep-sea minerals within their waters”.

The activity has prompted concern in Rarotonga. Don Beer, head of Cook Islands’ Fishing Association, is firmly opposed to seabed mineral exploration, citing concerns about its potential impact on already declining fish stocks. His **unease** is **compounded** by China’s growing interest not just in minerals but also in the Cook Islands’ **maritime** resources.

“We’ve just got to get the best possible deal out of them. But we’ve got to be careful,” Beer says. “Like with any nation, we have to make sure they respect that we have sovereignty.”

Cook Islands is one example of a story playing out across the Pacific, where China has been steadily deepening its influence. In recent years Beijing has signed security and development deals with Solomon Islands, Kiribati and most recently Nauru, reshaping traditional alliances. For New Zealand and its allies, the fear is that China’s growing presence in the region could eventually translate into military access or control over critical infrastructure.

Powles says that for Beijing, deepening relations with the Cook Island **shores up** “closer diplomatic ties with Pacific Island partners and that helps to influence and shape a regional order”. From New Zealand’s perspective, she notes, the aid freeze was a sign of just how fragile the relationship has become.

“It is quite an extreme move to pause aid,” she says. “New Zealand has been increasingly clear over the years that, particularly in the security **realm**, that it sees China as a **disruptor** and a destabilising actor in the Pacific.”

Next month, the Cook Islands will mark 60 years of self-government in free association with New Zealand. As preparations for a massive inter-island celebration unfold, the event is **tinged** with diplomatic unease. Cook Islands has invited New Zealand to attend – Wellington says their attendance is still “under consideration”.

In addition to pausing financial assistance, New Zealand is also not considering new funding “until the Cook Islands Government takes concrete steps to repair the relationship and restore trust”.

“New Zealand and Cook Islands officials are engaging on this,” a New Zealand ministry of foreign affairs and trade spokesperson told the Guardian.

“New Zealand hopes that steps will be taken swiftly to address New Zealand’s concerns so that this support can be resumed as soon as possible.”

The Guardian contacted the Chinese embassy in New Zealand for comment, but did not receive a response.

At a press briefing in Beijing last month, Foreign ministry spokesperson Guo Jiakun said China’s cooperation with the Cook Islands “targets no third party, nor should it be **interfered** with or **constrain**ed by any third party”.

He said the two countries were “comprehensive strategic partners based on mutual respect and common development”, adding that their partnership was based on “equality and mutual benefit”.

But others, like Browne, are worried about China’s growing influence. She fears her country will “be swallowed up in China’s money”.

“I totally support us not being too reliant on others, I see that as a real positive,” she says.

“But when I see China’s involvement, I think: two steps forward, three steps back.”

#### [2025-07-14 Trump does deal with Nato allies to arm Ukraine and warns Russia of severe sanctions](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/14/trump-does-deal-with-nato-allies-to-arm-ukraine-and-warns-russia-of-severe-sanctions)

Donald Trump said he has **sealed** an agreement with Nato allies that will lead to large-scale arms deliveries to Ukraine, including Patriot missiles, and warned Russia that it will face severe sanctions if Moscow does not make peace within 50 days.

After a meeting with the Nato secretary general, Mark Rutte, Trump said they had agreed “a very big deal”, in which “billions of dollars’ worth of military equipment is going to be purchased from the United States, going to Nato … And that’s going to be quickly **distributed** to the battlefield.”

Speaking in the White House alongside a clearly delighted Rutte, the US president said the arms deliveries would be comprehensive and would include the Patriot missile batteries that Ukraine desperately needs for its air defences against a daily Russian aerial onslaught.

“It’s everything: it’s Patriots. It’s all of them. It’s a full **complement**, with the batteries,” Trump said.

He did not go into any more detail, but made clear the weapons would be entirely paid for by Washington’s European allies, and that initial missile deliveries would come “within days” from European stocks, on the **understanding** they would be **replenished** with US supplies.

At a White House lunch with religious leaders later in the day, Trump said the deal was “fully approved, fully done”.

“We’ll send them a lot of weapons of all kinds and they’re going to deliver those weapons immediately … and they’re going to pay,” he said.

At his meeting with Trump, Rutte said there was a significant number of Nato allies – including Germany, Finland, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, the Netherlands and Canada – ready to rearm Ukraine as part of the deal.

“They all want to be part of this. And this is only the first wave. There will be more,” he said.

The German chancellor, Friedrich Merz, said last week that Berlin was ready to acquire additional Patriot systems.

Trump claimed there was one country, which he did not name, but which had “17 Patriots getting ready to be shipped”. Monday’s deal would include that stockpile, or “a big portion of the 17”, he said.

Such an arms delivery would represent a significant reinforcement of Ukraine’s air defences. Kyiv is currently thought to have only six Patriot **batteries**, at a time when it is coming under frequent and intense Russian drone and missile bombardments.

At the same time, Trump expressed increased frustration with Vladimir Putin, whom he accused of giving the impression of pursuing peace while intensifying attacks on Ukrainian cities. He gave the Russian president a new deadline of 50 days to end the fighting or face 100% tariffs on Russian goods, and more importantly, sweeping “secondary tariffs”, suggesting trade sanctions would be imposed on countries who continue to pay for Russian oil and other **commodities**.

“The secondary tariffs are very, very powerful,” the president said.

The announcement marked a dramatic change for the administration, both in **substance** and tone.

The Trump White House had not only made clear it would continue its predecessor’s policy of continuing to supply Ukraine out of US stocks, but the president and his top officials have been **derisive** about Kyiv’s chances of **prevailing**.

On Monday, Trump delivered his most admiring language on Ukraine and its European backers to date, with Rutte on one side and the US vice-president, JD Vance, the administration’s biggest **sceptic** on US involvement in Europe, on the other.

“They fought with **tremendous** courage, and they continue to fight with tremendous courage,” Trump said of the Ukrainians.

“Europe has a lot of spirit for this war,” he said, suggesting he had been taken by surprise by the level of commitment shown by European allies at the Nato summit in The Hague last month. “The level of **esprit** de corps spirit that they have is amazing,” he said. “They really think it’s very, very important.

“Having a strong Europe is a very good thing. It’s a very good thing. So I’m okay with it,” he said.

Trump described his deepening **disillusion** with Putin, and suggested his wife, Melania, may have played a role in pointing out the Russian leader’s **duplicity** in talks over a peace deal.

“My conversations with him are always very pleasant. I say, isn’t that a very lovely conversation? And then the missiles go off that night,” Trump said. “I go home, I tell the first lady: I spoke with Vladimir today. We had a wonderful conversation. She said: Really? Another city was just hit.”

Ukrainian regional officials reported at least six civilians killed and 30 injured by Russian bombing in the past 24 hours. The country’s air force said Moscow had attacked with 136 drones and four S-300 or S-400 missiles.

“Look, I don’t want to say he’s an **assassin**, but he’s a tough guy. It’s been proven over the years. He’s fooled a lot of people,” Trump said, listing his predecessors in the White House.

“He didn’t fool me. But what I do say is that at a certain point, ultimately talk doesn’t talk. It’s got to be action,” he said.

Russian officials and pro-war bloggers on Monday largely **shrugged off** Trump’s announcement, declaring it to be less significant than anticipated.

Konstantin Kosachev, a senior Russian lawmaker, wrote on Telegram that it amounted to “**hot air**”.

It was broadly welcomed in Kyiv, where there has been longstanding and deep anxiety about Trump’s intentions. Andrii Kovalenko, a member of Ukraine’s national security and defence council, posted a one-word response: “Cool.”

There was still scepticism however, over whether even the promise of new weaponry for Ukraine combined with the threat of trade sanctions would be enough to halt Russia’s offensive.

Illia Ponomarenko, a Ukrainian journalist and blogger wrote: “How many Ukrainian lives could have been saved if, from the very beginning, Trump had listened to wise and honest people about helping Ukraine, instead of the **artful** lies of that **cannibal** Putin on the phone?”.

#### [2025-07-14 Kyiv hails US weapons deal as Moscow dismisses Trump’s sanctions threat](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/14/kyiv-hails-us-weapons-deal-as-moscow-dismisses-trump-sanctions-threat)

Politicians in Kyiv have welcomed Donald Trump’s announcement that billions of dollars worth of US military equipment will be sent to Ukraine, while officials in Moscow dismissed his threat of sanctions against Russia as hot air.

In a meeting with the Nato secretary general, Mark Rutte, at the White House, Trump said the US would send Patriot anti-aircraft batteries and interceptor missiles, paid for by European allies.

He promised that additional Patriot systems would arrive within days, funded by Germany and other Nato partners, which would be a significant step in helping Ukraine to defend itself. Kyiv is believed to have only six **functioning** Patriot batteries.

The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, expressed gratitude to Trump on Monday evening.

“I am grateful to President Trump for his readiness to support the protection of our people’s lives,” Zelenskyy said in his nightly video address.

Zelenskyy also said he had had a “productive” discussion in Kyiv with Keith Kellogg, Trump’s special representative to Ukraine.

He later said he had spoken to Trump and Rutte since the announcement.

Andrii Kovalenko, a member of Ukraine’s national security and defence council, earlier summed up the positive response from Zelenskyy’s government in a one-word reaction: “Cool.”

Others acknowledged that Ukraine’s relations with Washington had signally improved since Zelenskyy’s disastrous meeting with Trump in the Oval Office in February.

But there was also scepticism that the new package – coupled with the threat of sanctions on the Russian economy in 50 days’ time – would be enough to persuade Moscow to stop fighting. One former Ukrainian military officer said it was unlikely to make a meaningful impression on the Kremlin, or act as a strong deterrent.

The independent MP Mariana Bezuhla – a **prominent** critic of Zelenskyy and his top military team – dismissed the announcement as an empty “game”. “Trump gave Putin another 50 days to seize Ukraine,” she posted on social media.

Referring to cities in the east of the country, where Russian troops are advancing, she said: “Well, then, let’s see, **carte blanche**, so to speak. To the Dnipro or Kramatorsk – everything is so **appetising**.”

Russian officials and pro-war bloggers largely dismissed Trump’s threats, portraying them as far less serious than anticipated.

Konstantin Kosachev, a senior Russian lawmaker, wrote on Telegram that the US president’s ultimatum amounted to “hot air”, suggesting he could easily walk it back. “A lot can change in 50 days – on the battlefield and in the mindset of those in power, both in the US and in Nato,” he wrote.

Yuri Podolyaka, a popular pro-Kremlin military blogger, similarly wrote on Telegram that Trump “could change his ‘opinion’ several times in the next 50 days”.

Podolyaka and other commentators pointed to the main Moscow stock index, which gained more than 2.5% after Trump’s announcement.

The shift in tone stood in stark contrast to the earlier anxiety in Moscow, where state media had speculated that Trump might announce the delivery of long-range missiles capable of reaching the Russian capital.

Some voices in Moscow, however, **lamented** that Trump’s once-positive relationship with Putin may have fundamentally shifted. “A new reality on Ukraine began today with Trump’s statement,” said Sergei Markov, a pro-Kremlin commentator.

“As of today, he’s **pressuring** only Russia and supporting Ukraine,” he wrote on Telegram.

In Ukraine, there was frustration that it had taken the Trump administration nearly six months to agree to send substantial military support, at a time when Ukrainian cities were under heavy fire. Russia **pounded** Kyiv in a seven-hour attack last week, killing two people, and dispatched a record 741 drones and ballistic missiles across the country.

The journalist and blogger Illia Ponomarenko suggested Trump had allowed himself to be **deceived** in his dealings with Putin.

“How many Ukrainian lives could have been saved if, from the very beginning, Trump had listened to wise and honest people about helping Ukraine, instead of the artful lies of that cannibal Putin on the phone?” he wrote. Rather, Trump had believed he could ‘“achieve peace’ by **indulging** and encouraging the aggressor’s appetite”, he said.

#### [2025-07-16 Ukraine wing of US-founded terrorist group says it was involved in killing of intelligence officer in Kyiv](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/16/the-base-terrorist-group-ukraine-assassination)

The Ukrainian wing of an internationally **proscribed** far-right terrorist organization with suspected links to Russia is claiming involvement in the **brazen** assassination of an intelligence officer in Kyiv.

Late last week, a masked assailant shot and killed Col Ivan Voronych of the Ukraine security service (SBU) as he walked through a Kyiv parking lot in broad daylight. Shocking footage of the assassination circulated in Ukrainian media and caused a stir among residents in the capital.

For months, the Base, born in the US and with a web of cells all over the world, has been offering money to supporters or willing participants for targeted assassinations and attacks on the critical infrastructure of Ukraine, coinciding with allegations that its American founder, Rinaldo Nazzaro, was a Kremlin spy. Ukrainian authorities have also been warning in recent weeks of similar Russian intelligence operations covertly paying unknowing citizens to carry out sabotage inside their country.

“The shooting of the SBU colonel is not the end, but only the beginning,” said a statement posted on a Telegram channel that appears to be linked to the the Base’s supposed Ukrainian cell. “We will continue our struggle until justice prevails.”

The same post, translated from Ukrainian, added that the group’s members were “proud of our **associates**” who carried out the killing and said they didn’t care if **naysayers** thought of them as “terrorists and extremists”. In another message to subscribers, the account also threatens other Ukrainian public figures and promises: “The hunt continues!”

Sources in the counter-terrorism field reviewed the posts and said they appeared credible and represented an escalation from the Base, which is now either **endorsing** **treasonous** murders inside of Ukraine, actively **commissioning** them, or both.

On Sunday, the SBU announced it had killed the two suspects they say were instructed and supplied with a **pistol** to assassinate Voronych on behalf of “Russian special services” handlers. Other media reports in Ukraine reported the assassins were foreign nationals linked to criminal groups and were remotely supported by Russian intelligence.

Although originally a **stateside** extremist group, the Base had never publicly allied itself to the geopolitical goals of the Russian government of President Vladimir Putin, until very recently.

In April, the Base started waging what it described as an **insurgency** to establish an all-white **ethnostate** in the western Ukrainian oblast of Zakarpattia. So far, videos of arson attacks against what appear to be police and military vehicles, electric boxes and other targets have been uploaded to its accounts on Telegram, along with dozens of other geolocated videos inside Ukraine.

Nazzaro, who is a former Pentagon **contractor** with the US special forces, declined to comment on the Ukraine cell of the Base and the killing when reached on his Telegram account.

“I have no personal involvement in this incident and I don’t know who is responsible,” he added.

Previously, he had publicly endorsed the group’s Ukraine operations on Telegram and said it was being overseen by members inside the country that he did not control.

Multiple requests for comment sent to a **chatbot** and an active email address associated with the Ukrainian cell went unanswered.

“The Base has been highly active in Ukraine since March and has conducted at least 10 arson attacks targeting infrastructure and buildings throughout the country,” said Steven Rai, an analyst at the Institute for Strategic Dialogue (ISD) who has been closely monitoring the Base’s online activities. “They have repeatedly threatened a variety of terrorist actions, including acts of sabotage and the assassination of Ukrainian government officials.”

Rai continued: “While we cannot confirm whether the Base was truly responsible for this recent assassination of an SBU official, this action is very much in line with what they have been threatening to do for months and shows the **severity** of the threat they pose.”

In 2018, the Base became the subject of a relentless FBI counter-terrorism investigation that led to dozens of arrests and governments around the world **designating** it as a terrorist organization. Recently, the Base has **doubled down** on its recruitment efforts in Europe, and, with several new national cells across the continent – it has regrown its ranks inside the US and is clearly exporting its brand abroad – just as the Trump administration continues pulling FBI resources away from domestic terrorism investigations.

Nazzaro, who lives the life of a semi-**defected** American in St Petersburg with his Russian wife and family, has for years denied any associations with Russian intelligence, going so far as to tell a Kremlin-controlled television channel that he had “never had any contact with any Russian security services”.

But the digital **forensics** of the group and Nazzaro’s public history say otherwise: the Base’s online footprints rely heavily on Russian digital infrastructure, with its recruitment email using a Mail.ru address – the email service owned by a Putin ally. Nazzaro has never been charged publicly in the US, but was the subject of an FBI investigation and was once called a justice department “matter” by a US government official.

#### [2025-07-16 Ukraine war briefing: Don’t bomb Moscow, Trump says, after reportedly giving Zelenskyy the idea](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/16/ukraine-morning-briefing-dont-bomb-moscow-trump-says-after-reportedly-giving-zelenskyy-the-idea)

Donald Trump has said Volodymyr Zelenskyy should not bomb Moscow. His statement came soon after the Financial Times (£) reported he had asked Zelenskyy whether he could bomb Moscow, and privately encouraged Ukraine to step up deep strikes on Russia. “No, he shouldn’t target Moscow,” the US president said on Tuesday when asked if the Ukrainian president should attack the Russian capital. Asked if he intended to supply Ukraine with weapons that could reach deeper into Russian territory, Trump replied: “We’re not looking to do that.”

Ukraine on Tuesday was waiting for further details of the “billions of dollars” worth of US military equipment promised by Donald Trump, amid confusion **as to** how many Patriot air defence systems will be sent. On Monday, Trump said an unnamed country was ready to immediately provide “17 Patriots”. Ukraine is believed so far to possess six functioning Patriot air defence “batteries” – the truck-based radar and launch systems that fire the missiles. It was unclear if Trump was referring to the launch systems, the interceptor missiles that are their ammunition, or whether he understood the difference.

Several European countries said they were willing to buy US arms for Ukraine as **outlined** by Trump but did not yet know what was being asked of them. Washington officials have suggested that European countries will give up some of their own stocks of weapons for Ukraine and then buy replacements from the US. It would get weapons to Ukraine more quickly, but leave the donor countries waiting for new systems for their own defence.

Some US lawmakers voiced concern that Trump’s latest deadline – 50 days this time – for Putin to make peace gives him time to grab even more Ukrainian territory. Thom Tillis, a Republican senator from North Carolina, said: “The 50-day delay worries me that Putin would try to use the 50 days to win the war, or to be better positioned to negotiate a peace agreement after having murdered and potentially **collected** more ground. Tillis and Jeanne Shaheen, a Democrat from New Hampshire, lead a US Senate group that facilitates work between Congress and Nato.

Russian drones and missiles attacked widely **separated** areas of Ukraine, officials said in the early hours of Wednesday, with at least two people reported killed. National emergency services reported two deaths in drone strikes east of the north-eastern city of Kharkiv near the town of Kupiansk. In Kharkiv itself, the regional governor, Oleh Syniehubov, said at least 17 explosions were recorded in a 20-minute drone attack in which three people were injured. The head of the military administration in the south-eastern town of Kryvyi Rih, Oleksander Vilkul, said an **extended** missile and drones attack knocked out power and water supplies and caused injuries. The Kyiv mayor, Vitali Klitschko, said air defence units had gone into action in the capital.

Earlier, a Russian attack on Tuesday afternoon killed three people in Kupiansk and Sumy, Ukrainian authorities said. Russian officials said a Ukrainian drone attack on the western city of Voronezh wounded 27 people.

The Institute for the Study of war assessed that Ukrainian forces recently advanced in northern Sumy oblast; while Russian forces recently advanced near Kupiansk, Borova, and Toretsk.

The EU was unable to approve a new package of sanctions against Russia on Tuesday as Slovakia demanded more guarantees that it would not be harmed by a separate EU plan to **phase out** Russian gas. The EU foreign policy chief Kaja Kallas said she was “really sad” the sanctions did not get approved, adding that “the ball is in Slovakia’s **court**” and she hoped a deal could be reached on Wednesday.

Ukrainians celebrated Melania Trump on social media after Donald Trump suggested the first lady played a key role in pointing out to him Vladimir Putin’s duplicity, Luke Harding writes. “I go home, I tell the first lady: I spoke with Vladimir today. We had a wonderful conversation. She said: Really? Another city was just hit,” Trump said. One social media user posted a photo of “Agent Melania Trumpenko” looking **surreptitious** in a big hat and wearing a **blazer** with Ukraine’s **trident** **insignia**. Others **depicted** her being presented with a Ukrainian military cap and wearing the blue and yellow of Ukraine’s flag.

#### [2025-07-17 Ukraine war briefing: Weapons will be Europe’s support to Ukraine – not Trump’s, Kallas suggests](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/17/ukraine-war-briefing-weapons-will-be-europes-support-to-ukraine-not-trumps-kallas-suggests)

Donald Trump’s move to **take credit** for the additional weapons headed to Ukraine at Europe’s expense has created some **mild** friction in EU-US relations. “If we pay for these weapons, it’s our support,” said Kaja Kallas, the EU foreign policy chief, on Wednesday. “So it’s European support, and we are doing as much as we can to help Ukraine … If you promise to give the weapons but say that somebody else is going to pay for it, it’s not really given by you, is it? … We welcome President Trump’s announcement to send more weapons to Ukraine, although we would like to see the US share the burden.”

A meeting of Patriot owner nations and Ukraine donors – aiming to find additional Patriot air defence systems for Kyiv and chaired by Nato’s top military commander – could take place on Wednesday of next week, Reuters reported. A Nato official said the alliance would coordinate weapons deliveries through a mechanism known as Nato Security Assistance and Training for Ukraine based in Germany.

Kurt Volker, a former US ambassador to Nato, **predicted** Ukraine could ultimately receive 12 to 13 Patriot batteries but it could take a year for them all to be delivered. Trump caused confusion by saying one country had 17 Patriots, some of which would go directly to Ukraine. No Nato member except the US is believed to have that number of Patriot systems.

Ukraine must boost the proportion of weapons made at home to 50% within six months, Volodymyr Zelenskyy has declared. The president said he was **counting on** his new incoming government under prime minister Yulia Svyrydenko to **deliver** on the goal. Zelenskyy said that he, the outgoing PM and new defence minister Denys Shmyhal and the outgoing defence minister Rustem Umerov had met and decided that the defence ministry would have “greater influence in the domain of arms production”.

“Ukrainian-made weapons now **make up** about 40% of those used at the front and in our operations,” Zelenskyy said in his nightly video address. “This is already significantly more than at any time in our country’s **independence** … Our goal is to reach 50% Ukrainian-made weaponry within the first six months of the new government, by expanding our domestic production. I am confident this is achievable, thoug   h not easy.” Ukraine’s arms production ramp-up so far has **emphasised** drones and air defences. Zelenskyy has in recent weeks stressed the importance of developing drone interceptors to tackle **swarms** of attacking drones.

A Russian bomb hit a shopping centre and market in Dobropillia near the frontline, killing two people and injuring up to 27 on Wednesday. Vadym Filashkin, governor of the Donetsk region, said a 500kg (1,100lb) bomb was dropped at 5.20pm when shoppers were out. “The occupier specifically targeted the shopping centre. All nearby shopping centres have been either destroyed or damaged.” Zelenskyy described the attack as “simply **horrific**, stupid Russian terror. There is no military logic to their strikes, only an effort to take as many lives as possible.”

Russia earlier bombed four Ukrainian cities overnight into Wednesday, injuring at least 15 people as it mostly targeted energy infrastructure, officials said. Russia launched 400 Shahed and decoy drones, as well as one ballistic missile, during the night, the Ukrainian air force said. The strikes targeted Kharkiv in Ukraine’s north-east, Kryvyi Rih in central Ukraine, Vinnytsia in the west and Odesa in the south.

The Ukrainian foreign minister, Andrii Sybiha, urged the EU to **adopt** further sanctions against Moscow as he rejected as “lies, manipulation and distortion” Russian accusations that Kyiv didn’t want to **progress** peace talks. Sybiha reiterated that Kyiv was ready to hold them anytime. EU ambassadors were again unable to approve the 18th package of sanctions against Russia today as Slovakia maintained its opposition.

**Bot** networks have targeted Ukrainians in Russian-controlled regions, posting thousands of comments on social media aimed at “manufacturing an artificial consensus in favour of Russia”, according to a report released by the Atlantic Council thinktank and a “cognitive defence” company called OpenMinds that works with governments including Ukraine. The report said short-lived “**disposable**” bots commented on posts – often leaving **nonsensical** remarks under meaningless names, suggesting the use of generative AI. One post said: “Lord, how wonderful that Putin advocates for the use of peaceful weapons.”

#### [2025-07-17 Restaurant in China criticised for putting baby lion cuddles on menu](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/17/restaurant-china-baby-lion-cuddles-menu)

A restaurant in northern China has been criticised by animal **welfare** groups for offering an unusual item on the menu: lion **cub** **cuddles**.

According to a screenshot of a menu circulating on social media, Wanhui – a restaurant in Taiyuan, the capital of Shanxi province – has a **four-course** set afternoon menu costing 1,192 yuan ($166/£124) that includes playtime with the in-house animals.

The restaurant’s **profile** on Dazhong Dianping, a popular restaurant listings app, shows pictures of the lion cubs alongside other animals, such as deer and **alligators**.

The menu on the Dianping page does not include lions in its list of animals but says customers can play with **llamas**, turtles and **meerkats**.

Several photos show customers **snuggling** the baby lions.

In one review posted this month, a customer sits with a lion cub on her **lap**, holding the its paw to wave to the camera.

The woman’s review reads: “I can pet a cute little lion in a small shop! It’s called Simba, and looks so good. There are staff to guide you, so you don’t have to worry about safety issues!”

While some influencers have jumped at the chance to post eye-catching photographs on social media, the reaction of Chinese people online has been mostly negative. “They’re putting profit above consumer safety – it’s way too dangerous,” wrote one Weibo user.

Chinese media reported that the Shanxi forestry and grasslands bureau was investigating the matter, adding that this kind of human-animal contact was prohibited.

Peter Li, a China policy expert for Humane World for Animals, told Reuters: “Exploiting wild animals for **selfies** and marketing **gimmicks** is not only **appallingly** bad animal welfare, it’s also potentially risky for customers.”

It is not the first **exotic** animal welfare scandal in China. Last month, tourists visiting a zoo in Liaoning, in the north-east, were condemned for reaching through a metal grate to pull tufts of hair off a tiger.

A hotel in Chongqing, a city in south-west China, recently attracted **scorn** for offering a “wake-up service” delivered by red pandas, which could climb into guests’ beds.

Contact between humans and exotic animals has also been highlighted by experts as a potential risk for the spread of **zoonotic** diseases, such as Covid-19.

Staff at Wanhui repeatedly hung up the phone when called by the Guardian.

According to Reuters, the restaurant said the lion cubs were well cared for by **specialist staff**.

https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/17/taiwan-simulates-china-attack-city-streets-urban-warfare-annual-drill

Usually people in Taipei walk quite slowly. **Notoriously** so. But at 1.27pm on Thursday some were almost sprinting through the busy shopping district of Ximen. They knew they had three minutes to get where they needed to be or they would be stuck in the nearest underground bunker for half an hour.

At 1.30pm exactly, deafening sirens wailed across the city, and a text hit every mobile phone warning: “The enemy has launched a missile attack toward northern Taiwan.”

Cars and buses **pulled over** in Ximen, and everyone was **ushered** into the nearby metro station. Mr Liu, 70, was not quite fast enough to get to his meeting and was **pacing** the station entrance looking at his watch.

**Nevertheless** he said he supported the drills because they helped people “feel safe” and taught them what to do if one day the real thing – a Chinese airstrike – hits the city.

The annual drills have become increasingly significant in recent years, as China’s leader, Xi Jinping, **forges ahead** with his plans to annex Taiwan as Chinese territory, by force if his current strategy of intimidation and coercion fails. The wars in Ukraine and the Middle East also make the drills feel less **hypothetical**.

This year the drill has been **incorporated** into much larger civilian urban resilience exercises, in partnership with local governments and private companies such as supermarket chains. They are also being held **concurrently** with Han Kuang, Taiwan’s annual military exercises, which themselves have doubled in length and **ballooned** in size.

The exercises – a key demonstration of Taiwan’s defensive preparations against the threat of Chinese invasion – are normally **confined** to military bases, offshore islands, or **cordoned-off** beaches. But this year they have come much closer to the people, with urban warfare simulations in the city streets and on inter-county bridges, **repelling** assaults on airports and installing newly bought Himars multiple-launch rocket systems on the riverside bike path.

More than 20,000 **reservists** were involved in the force’s largest ever mobilisation, and about 52,000 of a planned 4 million people had been trained as disaster relief volunteers, the deputy interior minister, Maa Shyh-yuan, said this week. There are also proposed budget measures to better resource local village authorities.

The Guardian has previously reported that the government is exploring plans to have convenience stores serve as wartime hubs, and the Australian Broadcasting Corporation reported this week that taxi drivers were among civilian groups being trained for a wartime volunteer police force.

It is a “big strategic shift”, according to TH Schee, a Taiwan-based civil defence expert. “They used to just say ‘we will defeat the enemies on the beach’.”

Since taking office in May last year, Taiwan’s president, Lai Ching-te, has continued his predecessor’s boosting of the armed forces, **sharpened** laws and language against Chinese aggression, and **prioritised** civilian defence and resilience.

“The better prepared Taiwan is for geopolitical shifts and external threats, the safer it will be,” Lai said on Thursday, while inspecting a field hospital simulation at a city high school.

The increased **incorporation** of civilians has been welcomed by some non-government groups that have been lobbying for it for years.

“It also sends a message to the public: war is not as distant as we might think,” said Ying-Yu Lin, an expert in strategic studies at Tamkang University in Taiwan.

There are still some concerns. It is thought the estimated 100,000 air raid shelters marked on public safety maps and apps include all known underground spaces such as car parks or **basements**, which do not necessarily have **adequate** **ventilation** or power supply.

And some feel there is not a lot of instruction for people beyond telling them to get underground.

“We should be learning this from a young age,” said Mr Chen, 55, at Taipei main station’s shelter. “Like, how to protect yourself on the spot, or how people are supposed to maintain order inside buildings. But none of that was happening today.”

China’s ruling Communist party is obviously watching. It has labelled the drills “**futile**” provocations, and has increased the already **elevated** number of warplane and ship incursions into Taiwan’s air defence zone.

In the Ximen station, Mr Chen, an elderly resident of a neighbouring county, said the Taiwan government was doing a good job and he was glad to practise the air raid drills, but feared “Mr Xi Jinping will not be happy”.

At the high school, Lai said the exercises “were not a provocation”. “In the face of military and political pressure from major powers, preparation is our only option.”

https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/18/ukraine-war-briefing-us-moving-with-haste-to-enable-weapons-shipments-to-kyiv-says-washington

The US is moving to get weapons to Ukraine quickly under President Donald Trump’s plan for Europe to buy arms and is weighing selling Patriot air defence systems from its own stocks, Washington’s envoy to Nato has said. “We are all moving with **haste** to facilitate this and get this done, and, you know, I think things are actually moving very quickly,” the US ambassador to Nato, Matthew Whitaker, told journalists on Thursday. “But I can’t verify a date that this will all be completed.” Trump on Monday announced a deal with Nato chief Mark Rutte for European states in the alliance to buy US weaponry – particularly advanced Patriot systems – and give it to Kyiv, but questions have been raised over where the systems will come from and how soon they can get to Ukraine amid Russian bombardments.

Nato’s supreme commander in Europe said separately that preparations were under way to ship the first Patriot systems to Ukraine under the scheme. US general Alexus Grynkewich said there was an “ongoing conversation” about whether the US would sell Patriots already available in its own military stockpiles. The **Swiss** government, meanwhile, said delivery of US Patriot systems to Switzerland would be delayed as Washington **reprioritised** to provide more support to Ukraine. The moves came as Trump’s effort to take credit for the additional weapons headed to Ukraine at Europe’s expense created mild friction in EU-US relations, with the EU foreign policy chief, Kaja Kallas, saying: “If we pay for these weapons, it’s our support.”

Donald Trump’s decision to ramp up arms shipments to Ukraine is a signal to Kyiv to abandon peace efforts, Russia said, vowing it would not accept the “**blackmail**” of Washington’s new sanctions ultimatum. Trump on Monday set a 50-day deadline for Moscow to reach a ceasefire or face sanctions, while also promising more weaponry for Kyiv. Russia’s foreign ministry condemned the move, with spokesperson Maria Zakharova saying: “It is obvious that the Kyiv regime consistently **perceives** such decisions by the **collective** west as a signal to continue the slaughter and abandon the peace process.”

Russian troops have taken control of three villages in three different parts of the frontline running through Ukraine, the defence ministry claimed on Thursday. Official Ukrainian reports of activity along the 1,000km (600-mile) front **disputed** part of the Russian account, particularly concerning a key village in the south-east. The Russian defence ministry report named the three captured settlements as Kamianske in the south-eastern Zaporizhzhia region, Dehtiarne in north-eastern Kharkiv region and Popiv Yar in Donetsk region. The battlefield reports from either side could not be independently verified. Ukrainian military spokesperson Vladyslav Voloshyn told the liga.net media outlet that holding Kamianske, south-east of the region’s main town of Zaporizhzhia, was important to keep that city safe from attack.

Russian lawmakers have advanced a bill that would **outlaw** opening or searching for content online judged “extremist”, such as songs glorifying Ukraine and material by **feminist** rock band Pussy Riot. Critics say the law, which has drawn a rare **backlash** from across Russia’s political spectrum, would **stifle** internet freedom. The legislation threatens **fines** of up to 5,000 rubles ($64) on anyone found to have deliberately searched for or gained access to material listed as extremist by the justice ministry. More than 5,000 entries are on the list, including webpages, political slogans, books, **artworks** and music albums.

Slovakia will stop blocking the approval of the 18th package of European Union sanctions against Russia on Friday, the prime minister said. Robert Fico said on Thursday that Slovakia had achieved as much as it could at this point, after blocking the EU’s approval of the sanctions multiple times to demand guarantees against damages it fears from a separate EU plan to end all gas imports from Russia from 2028. EU countries’ ambassadors would meet on Friday morning to approve the new sanctions. The European Commission last month proposed the 18th package of sanctions against Russia for its 2022 invasion of Ukraine, aimed at Moscow’s energy revenue, banks and military industry.

#### [2025-07-20 Japan PM Shigeru Ishiba vows to stay on despite losing upper house majority](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/20/apan-pm-election-result-exit-polls-predict-loss-of-upper-house)

Japanese prime minister Shigeru Ishiba’s has vowed to stay on despite his **coalition** losing its upper house majority in elections that saw strong gains by a rightwing **populist** party.

While the **ballot** does not directly determine whether Ishiba’s minority government falls, it **heaps** pressure on the **embattled** leader, who also lost control of the more powerful lower house in October and who has never been popular within his own party.

Ishiba told a news conference he would remain in office to oversee tariff talks with the United States and other **pressing** matters such as rising consumer prices that are straining the world’s fourth largest economy.

His Liberal Democratic party (LDP) and coalition partner Komeito needed 50 seats to secure the 248-seat upper **chamber** in an election in which half the seats were up for grabs, but had only secured 47, with one seat left to declare, as of Monday morning.

Speaking to NHK earlier, Ishiba, 68, said he “**solemnly**” accepted the “harsh result”.

Asked whether he intended to stay on as prime minister and party leader, he said: “That’s right. It’s a difficult situation, and we have to take it very **humbly** and seriously.”

But the result also weakens Ishiba’s position just days before the country needs to negotiate a deal with the Trump administration to **avert** the imposition of punishing tariffs in its largest export market.

Ishiba later told TV Tokyo: “We are engaged in extremely critical tariff negotiations with the United States … we must never ruin these negotiations. It is only natural to devote our complete dedication and energy to realising our national interests.”

Japan faces a deadline of 1 August to strike a trade deal with the US.

Japanese imports are already subject to a 10% tariff, while the auto industry – which accounts for 8% of jobs – is **reeling from** a 25% levy.

Weak export data last week, which showed **plummeting** US-bound auto deliveries, **stoked** fears that Japan could tip into a technical recession.

The centre-left main opposition Constitutional Democratic party now has a total of 37 seats, with the centre-right Democratic Party for the People now on 22.

The far-right Sanseito party won 14 seats, up from one seat, giving it a significant presence in the upper house. Birthed on YouTube in 2020, it has been the election’s surprise package with its “Japanese first” campaign and warnings about a “silent invasion” of foreigners.

Turnout was 58%, six points higher than the last upper house vote, with a record number of people casting ballots in advance, in part due to the election falling in the middle of a three-day weekend. Sanseito has been appealing to a sizeable disillusioned segment of the population who feel ignored by the mainstream parties and rarely vote.

Opposition parties advocating for tax cuts and welfare spending have struck a **chord** with voters, exit polls showed, as rising consumer prices – particularly a jump in the cost of rice – have sowed frustration at the government’s response.

“The LDP was largely playing defence in this election, being on the wrong side of a key voter issue,” said David Boling, a director at the consulting firm Eurasia Group.

“Polls show that most households want a cut to the consumption tax to address inflation, something that the LDP opposes. Opposition parties seized on it and hammered that message home.”

The LDP has been urging for fiscal restraint, with one eye on a very **jittery** government bond market, as investors worry about Japan’s ability to **refinance** the world’s largest debt pile.

Sanseito, which first emerged during the Covid pandemic spreading conspiracy theories about vaccinations and a **cabal** of global elites, has dragged once **fringe** political rhetoric into the mainstream and gained wider support among frustrated voters.

It remains to be seen whether the party can follow the path of other far-right parties with which it has drawn comparisons, such as Germany’s AfD and Reform UK.

“I am attending graduate school but there are no Japanese around me. All of them are foreigners,” said Yu Nagai, a 25-year-old student who voted for Sanseito earlier on Sunday.

“When I look at the way compensation and money are spent on foreigners, I think that Japanese people are a bit disrespected,” he said after casting his ballot at a polling station in Tokyo’s Shinjuku ward.

In Japan, which has the world’s oldest population, foreign-born residents hit a record of about 3.8 million last year.

That is still just 3% of the total population, a much smaller fraction than in the US and Europe, but comes amid a tourism boom that has made foreigners far more visible across the country.

#### [2025-07-21 Ukraine war briefing: Russia insists on sticking to its war demands amid Trump sanctions threat](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/21/ukraine-war-briefing-russia-insists-on-sticking-to-its-war-demands-amid-trump-sanctions-threat)

Russia has said it is open to peace with Ukraine but insists achieving its goals remains a priority, days after Donald Trump gave Moscow a 50-day deadline to agree to a ceasefire or face tougher sanctions. Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov reiterated Russia’s demands on Sunday, including Ukraine withdrawing from Russia-annexed regions and abandoning its Nato aspirations – **terms** that Kyiv and its allies have rejected. “The main thing for us is to achieve our goals,” Peskov told state TV. “Our goals are clear.”

Ukrainian officials proposed a new round of peace talks this week, President Volodymyr Zelenskyy said on Saturday, while Russian state media said on Sunday that no date had yet been set for the negotiations but Istanbul would probably remain the host city. A week ago Trump, the US president, threatened Russia with “severe tariffs” unless a peace deal was reached within 50 days and announced a **rejuvenated** pipeline for US weapons to reach Ukraine amid his frustration at unsuccessful talks to end the war.

Russia launched a barrage of drones and missiles at Ukraine in an overnight attack on Monday, killing at least one person and causing multiple fires in Kyiv, city officials said. Rescuers and medics were working on sites across four districts of the capital, said its mayor, Vitali Klitschko. A subway station in central Kyiv as well as commercial property, shops, houses and a kindergarten were damaged, officials said. Explosions were heard across the city as air defence units engaged in repelling the attack and many Kyiv residents took shelter in underground stations.

Russia’s biggest oil producer Rosneft has condemned European Union sanctions on India’s Nayara Energy refinery as unjustified and illegal, saying the restrictions directly threatened India’s energy security. The EU’s 18th package of sanctions against Russia over Ukraine was approved on Friday and is aimed at further hitting Russia’s oil and energy industry. Rosneft said on Sunday it held less than 50% in Nayara – one of the targeted companies – and called the EU’s justification for the sanctions “**far-fetched** and false in context”. The EU foreign policy chief, Kaja Kallas, has said the sanctions package is one of the strongest yet against Russia and “we will keep raising the costs, so stopping the aggression becomes the only path forward for Moscow”.

Two women were injured in southern Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region when a drone struck their house on Sunday, according to the regional military administration. Two more civilians were injured in the north-eastern Kharkiv province after a drone **slammed** into a residential building, local Ukrainian officials said.

Drones struck a **leafy** square in the centre of Sumy later on Sunday, wounding a woman and her seven-year-old son, officials said. The strike also damaged a power line, leaving about 100 **households** without electricity, according to Serhii Krivosheienko of the **municipal** military administration.

Ukraine’s air force said it shot down 18 of 57 Shahed-type and decoy drones launched by Russia overnight into Sunday, with seven more disappearing from radar. Russia’s defence ministry said its forces shot down 93 Ukrainian drones targeting Russian territory overnight, including at least 15 that appeared to head for Moscow.

Ten more Ukrainian drones were downed on the approach to the Russian capital on Sunday, according to mayor Sergei Sobyanin. He said one drone struck a residential building in Zelenograd, on Moscow’s outskirts, damaging an apartment but causing no casualties.

#### [2025-07-21 China starts building world’s biggest hydropower dam](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/21/china-starts-building-world-biggest-hydropower-dam-yarlung-tsangpo-river-tibet)

Construction of the world’s biggest **hydropower** megadam has begun, China’s premier has said, calling it the “project of the century”.

The huge structure is being built on the Yarlung Tsangpo river, in Tibetan territory.

Li Qiang made the comments on Saturday, at a ceremony in the region to mark the start of the build, leading Chinese markets to rise on the expectation of the long-planned megaproject, first announced in 2020 as part of China’s 14th five-year plan.

The dam has drawn criticism from India and **Bangladesh**, through which the river runs, as well as Tibetan groups and environmentalists.

The project announced by Li is planned for the **lower reaches** of the river, according to the official state news outlet, Xinhua. Xinhua reported that the project would consist of five cascade hydropower stations, producing an estimated 300 million **megawatt** hours of electricity annually at a cost of about 1.2tn yuan (£124bn).

In comparison, the Three **Gorges** dam cost 254.2bn yuan and generates 88.2m MWh.

No further details were given about timing or scope of construction, but the figures reported by Xinhua exceed estimates from 2020.

China, the world’s biggest carbon emitter, is operating a huge renewable energy **expansion** as it seeks to reach emissions reduction goals and stabilise its power supply. It has tens of thousands of hydropower projects, far more than any other country.

The Yarlung Tsangpo megadam will reportedly **harness** the power created by the river dropping 2km in about 50km as it winds through a **canyon** on a U-shaped **bend**.

India and Bangladesh have voiced concerns over the project, fearing the water could be held or diverted away from them.

The Yarlung Tsangpo becomes the Brahmaputra river as it flows south into India’s Arunachal Pradesh and Assam states and finally into Bangladesh as the Jamuna river. Damming it could affect millions of people downstream.

“China can always weaponise this water in terms of blocking it or diverting it,” Neeraj Singh Manhas, **special adviser** for South Asia at the Parley Policy Initiative, told the BBC in January.

The Indian government formally registered its concerns with Beijing over the project in December, and during bilateral meetings between the two countries’ foreign ministers in January.

In response, officials have said China does not seek “water hegemony” and never pursues “benefits for itself at the expense of its neighbours”.

“China will continue to maintain current exchange channels with downstream nations and step up cooperation on disaster prevention and mitigation,” a foreign ministry spokesperson said in December.

Tibetan groups have also noted the presence of sacred sites along the river, and the lack of information about potential population displacement.

Other hydropower projects in Tibet have inspired rare protests, resulting in brutal crackdowns from authorities, according to activists. Last year hundreds of people were arrested while protesting against the Kamtok dam on the upper reaches of the Yangtze river, which they said threatened to displace thousands of residents and submerge ancient Buddhist **monasteries**. The Three Gorges Dam is estimated to have displaced about 1.5 million people.

Environmentalists have also expressed concern about wildlife in the region, as well as the significant **tectonic** shifting, severe landslides and extreme geography where the dam is expected to go.

The Chinese government rejects the criticism, and says the project will stimulate jobs in the region, increase domestic energy supplies and **spur** on development in the renewables sector. “Special emphasis must be placed on **ecological** **conservation** to prevent environmental damage,” Li said.

#### [2025-07-22 China blocks US federal employee from leaving](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/22/china-blocks-us-federal-employee-from-leaving)

The Chinese government has blocked a US federal employee from leaving China, the US state department has confirmed.

The federal employee works for the US **Patent** and **Trademark** Office, and was visiting China in a **personal capacity**, according to the state department. “We are tracking this case very closely and are engaged with Chinese officials to resolve the situation as quickly as possible,” a spokesperson said.

Chinese authorities confirmed that another American, Wells Fargo banker, Chenyue Mao, had also been blocked from leaving. Both individuals have been subjected to an “exit ban”.

Exit bans are a controversial mechanism used by the Chinese government to bar both Chinese citizens and foreigners from leaving, for reasons ranging from criminal investigations to unsettled **civil disputes**, but is also used as a **leverage tool** in diplomatic disputes.

The exact reasons for the federal employee’s exit ban are unclear, but the Washington Post had previously reported that the worker, whose identity has not been released, was stopped from leaving the country after he failed to **disclose** his government employment on the visa application. He reportedly had also served in the US Army.

It has been reported as the first time a US government employee has been affected.

Chinese foreign ministry spokesman, Guo Jiakun, said he had “no details to share” about the case when asked at a regular press briefing on Monday. However, Guo did confirm the exit ban on Mao, saying she was involved in a criminal case and obliged to cooperate with an investigation.

“Chenyue Mao is involved in a criminal case currently being handled by Chinese **law-enforcement authorities** and is subject to exit restrictions in accordance with the law,” Guo said.

Wells Fargo has since banned all employees from travelling to China since Mao – a **naturalised** US citizen of **Chinese descent** – was stopped from leaving.

A 2023 report by Safeguard Defenders said that since Xi Jinping came to power in 2012, “China has expanded the **legal landscape** for exit bans and increasingly used them, sometimes outside legal justification”.

Exit bans have been used against activists and journalists – including foreign **correspondents** – and family members of the people actually of interest to the Chinese government. In 2019 two American siblings were allowed to return home after three years trapped in China. Cynthia and Victor Liu were subject to an exit ban, despite not facing any criminal allegations. Their father, a former bank official and **fugitive** Liu Changming, was wanted in China to face **fraud charges**.

#### [2025-07-22 Arrests in China after more than 230 kindergarten children poisoned by lead paint in food](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/22/arrests-in-china-after-more-than-230-kindergarten-children-poisoned-by-lead-paint-in-food-ntwnfb)

Chinese authorities have arrested six people and launched disciplinary investigations into almost 30 others after more than 230 kindergarten children were poisoned by food coloured with industrial-grade **lead paint**.

The incident, which occurred in Gansu province earlier this month, is one of China’s worst school food safety incidents and has drawn national attention. An investigative report released by the Gansu provincial party committee on Sunday found a **litany** of failures in safety and oversight, as well as attempts to **cover up** the incident, **bribe** people in charge and modify test results.

The report said the **principal** at the Tianshui kindergarten had wanted to attract more **enrolments** by “enhancing” the colour and look of the food served to children. The school’s cook bought industrial-grade **pigment** online, adding it to dishes despite the packages saying it was “not for **consumption**”.

One pigment was found to have lead levels 400,000 times the safe legal limit. The report said the school had previously bought food-safe colouring, at a cheaper cost, but preferred the “brighter” colours.

Initially, 235 students were hospitalised after eating the coloured food. Local state media quoted a parent at the time saying children had suffered stomach pain and **nausea**, and some children’s teeth had turned black. Final tests revealed that 247 students, as well as staff including the principal, had elevated lead levels in their blood as a result of eating the food.

Six kindergarten staff, including the principal, have been arrested, accused of knowingly serving toxic and harmful food. Disciplinary investigations have been launched into the actions of 27 others working for the school, hospital and government.

However, Sunday’s report revealed mistakes and mishandling at almost every level of the process and response.

It said the Gansu Provincial Centre for Disease Control and Prevention **neglected** the case after accepting it, and took samples in a way that violated health regulations and led to a “huge difference” in the test results and the actual levels.

At the Tianshui Second People’s hospital, at least two children’s test results were illegally “modified” to record substantially lower lead levels, the report said.

“The management of Tianshui Second People’s hospital and its **laboratory** department was chaotic, job responsibilities were not fully implemented, laboratory quality control was not fully implemented and **relevant** inspection personnel lacked systematic training,” the report said.

It also accused the local education bureau of having “turned a blind eye” to the kindergarten – which charges high fees – operating without a proper licence, and not conducting food safety inspections at any private kindergarten for two years. It said officials in charge of preschool education across multiple departments were suspected of accepting benefits and bribes from the Tianshui kindergarten’s major investor and others linked to the school.

The report said China’s top anti-corruption authorities had filed a case for review and investigation against government officials of multiple levels, and opened an investigation into senior management at the hospital.

It said the children had been treated and all but one had been **discharged** after the first round of treatment, during which lead levels dropped by an average of 40%.

“The provincial party committee and the provincial government are deeply saddened by the abnormal blood lead problem in the Brownstone Peixin Kindergarten in Maiji district, Tianshui city, and express their deep apologies to the children and their parents,” the report said.

The release of the report was accompanied by reported protests by parents on Sunday evening outside the kindergarten. Footage shared online by Teacher Li, who monitors dissent inside China, claimed to show clashes between police and a few hundred people outside the Tianshui kindergarten.

The footage showed officers using physical force, including **batons**, and angry parents confronting individuals in **plain clothes**, questioning their use of violence. As police cars appeared to try to escort the plain-clothed individuals away, parents blocked the road, shouting: “Hand over those who beat people up.”

#### [2025-07-23 Ukraine war briefing: Mirage fighter jet crashes after pilot ejects due to technical fault](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/23/ukraine-war-briefing-mirage-fighter-jet-crashes-after-pilot-ejects-due-to-technical-fault)

A **Mirage** 2000 fighter jet supplied to Ukraine from France crashed on Tuesday after an **equipment failure**, with the pilot ejecting safely, Ukraine’s military said. It was the first loss of a Mirage since Ukraine started receiving them this year. “Equipment failure occurred, which the pilot reported to the flight controller,” said a military statement. “The pilot then acted **competently**, as is expected in crisis situations, and successfully ejected. A rescue crew found the pilot in a stable condition. There were no casualties on the ground.” Ukrainian news reports said the crash was in the Volyn oblast of north-western Ukraine.

Volodymyr Zelenskyy has approved a **contentious** bill weakening Ukraine’s anti-corruption bodies, according to reports, hours after the first serious protests against his government took place in Kyiv. Luke Harding reports from the Ukrainian capital that the Verkhovna Rada passed the controversial bill, which critics say allows political interference and is a major step backwards in the fight against corruption. About 1,500 protesters gathered next to Zelenskyy’s presidential administration complex shouting “Shame” and “Veto the law” while waving banners. There were protests in other large cities including Dnipro, Lviv and Odesa.

Russian authorities have systematically involved children in the design and testing of drones for the war through nationwide competitions that begin with **innocent-seeming** video games and end up with the most talented students **headhunted** by defence companies, an investigation by the exiled Russian news outlet the Insider has found. The Insider spoke with three teenage **finalists** from the competition working on drone technology, who explained how it worked and detailed how they were fully aware of the military application of certain projects but were encouraged to hide it.

Sanctioning Russian oil to end the Ukraine war is a “very real possibility”, the US energy secretary, Chris Wright, said on Fox News on Tuesday. Donald Trump has spoken of 100% tariffs on buyers of Russian oil and other sanctions if Moscow does not agree to a major peace agreement with Ukraine, giving a 50-day deadline that ends in early September. Trump, though, has also **continually** extended, reset or failed to **honour** deadlines – starting with his **unmet** promise to end the war in 24 hours – and placed low expectations on Russia’s behaviour.

Ukraine’s former defence minister and current secretary of the security council, Rustem Umerov, will head Kyiv’s delegation in talks that Ukraine has offered to hold with Russia on Wednesday in Istanbul. The Kremlin has said only that it hoped talks can be held “this week”. Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, has said Kyiv is ready to “secure the release of our people from captivity and return abducted children, to stop the killings, and to prepare a leaders’ meeting”.

A Russian drone and missile **salvo** on Ukraine killed a 10-year-old boy in the eastern frontline city of Kramatorsk, and wounded more than a dozen people across the country on Tuesday, Kyiv’s authorities said.

A Ukrainian drone strike on a bus in the Russian-occupied part of the Kherson region killed three people and wounded another three, a Moscow-installed official said. One man died in Russia’s western border Belgorod region after a Ukrainian attack, according to the local governor.

Howard Phillips, 65, has been found guilty of assisting a foreign intelligence service after handing over personal details of the then British defence secretary, Grant Shapps, to two **undercover** officers who posed as Russian agents. Phillips, from Harlow in Essex, handed a **USB stick** containing details relating to Shapps, including his home address and the location of his private plane, to one of the officers, the trial heard. Phillips was arrested in May 2024 and charged under the National Security Act. He had written to the Russian embassy offering his services. He is due to be sentenced in the autumn.

#### [2025-07-23 Zelenskyy pledges new bill on anti-corruption agencies’ independence as protests continue](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/23/zelenskyy-corruption-agency-eu-protests-ukraine)

Volodymyr Zelenskyy promised a new bill to strengthen the rule of law in Ukraine on Wednesday, in an apparent attempt to assuage popular anger at his decision to weaken the powers of two independent anti-corruption agencies.

Thousands of protesters took to the streets of Kyiv for a second day, while European leaders expressed concern at the Ukrainian president’s contentious decision. The demonstrators gathered outside the presidential office, shouting anti-government slogans.

They want him to scrap a controversial law that effectively places the agencies under government control. In a video address, Zelenskyy sought to deflect criticism by promising a new presidential bill.

It would guarantee the independence of anti-corruption institutions and at the same time ensure there was “no Russian influence”, he said. “Of course, everyone has heard what people are saying these days – on social media, to each other, on the streets. It’s not falling on deaf ears,” he added.

But the apparent concession left protesters unimpressed. They said Zelenskyy has not agreed to scrap the controversial aspects of Tuesday’s bill and pointed out that the Verkhovna Rada – Ukraine’s parliament, which approved the changes – has gone on holiday for the summer recess.

Olha Ivanova, who has worked in the anti-corruption sector, said the government was calculating that the protests would fizzle out. She predicted they would continue. “Civil society is huge in Ukraine. From time to time we have to remind the people in power that we elect them,” she said.

Ivanova held up a placard in English and Ukrainian that read: “Have you lost your mind?” She said she hoped Zelenskyy would reverse his decision, adding: “He’s not a dictator. Nobody would say this. He’s a president in a very difficult political context during a war.”

Ukraine’s European backers including Germany, France and Sweden have echoed concerns about the new legislation, which the Ukrainian president approved on Tuesday night. They warned it could hamper Kyiv’s attempt to join the EU and hinder the fight against corruption.

The bill gives sweeping powers to the prosecutor general’s office. It can now decide which cases the two independent agencies – the national anti-corruption bureau and the specialised anti-corruption prosecutor’s office – are allowed to pursue.

The two institutions have been key to fighting high-level corruption and protecting billions in international aid and investment. Critics say they have been stripped of their autonomy, making them indistinguishable from ordinary law enforcement bodies.

Zelenskyy says the shake-up was needed to clean Ukraine’s “anti-corruption infrastructure” of alleged Russian connections. On Wednesday, he convened a meeting with the heads of law enforcement and anti-corruption agencies at his presidential office in Kyiv.

Olena Kurnytska, a 21-year-old student at York University, took part in Wednesday’s protest for the first time. She waved a placard saying “I would like to see the future, not the flashbacks”. She said: “We feel like its our civic duty to be here. It’s an easy situation to exploit. A wartime government can twist democracy more easily.”

Ursula von der Leyen, the head of the European Commission, was one of several prominent European figures who voiced unhappiness at the legislative amendments. She had asked Zelenskyy for explanations and had conveyed to him her strong concerns, her spokesperson said.

They added: “The respect for the rule of law and the fight against corruption are core elements of the European Union. As a candidate country, Ukraine is expected to uphold these standards fully. There cannot be a compromise.”

In a pointed message to Kyiv, the EU’s defence commissioner, Andrius Kubilius, said trust during wartime was “easy to lose with one significant mistake by the leadership … Transparency and open European dialogue is the only way to repair [it].”

France’s European minister, Benjamin Haddad, said there was still time for Ukraine to reverse its decision. “It is not too late to go back on this,” he told France Inter radio. “We will be extremely vigilant on the subject.”

The popular backlash against the bill is turning into the biggest domestic political crisis of Zelenskyy’s premiership. The crowd on Wednesday was larger than the night before. The street protests, which took place in several cities, were the first since Vladimir Putin’s 2022 full-scale invasion.

Civil-society leaders have accused the presidential administration of violating an informal contract with society. They say the agreement with government – that it was inappropriate to criticise official abuses because of the war with Russia – is definitively over.

About 3,000 demonstrators gathered directly outside Zelenskyy’s administration complex on Wednesday evening, shouting slogans beneath his window. They included “shame”, “we are the power”, and “veto the law”.

Posting earlier on Telegram, Zelenskyy said Ukrainians faced a “common enemy” in the shape of “Russian occupiers”. Of public criticism, he said: “We all hear what society says. We see what people expect from state institutions to ensure justice and the efficiency of each institution.”

Yuriy Sak, a former adviser to Ukraine’s defence ministry, said Ukrainians had a strong historical tradition of protesting against anything that resembled authoritarianism or dictatorship, in Soviet times and today.

“It’s in our DNA. We have a very good sense for where the red line is, and for when people cross this line. If anyone tries to tighten their grip on power people pour into the streets,” he said, citing the uprisings in 2004 and 2014 against perceived government misrule.

Sak likened the collective mood to the air raid alerts that sound most evenings, when Kyiv and other cities came under Russian missile attack. “Whenever we see authoritarianism on the move, a silent siren goes off in Ukrainian heads,” he suggested.

#### [2025-07-24 North Korea’s military is being transformed on the battlefields of Ukraine – so why is Seoul silent?](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jul/24/north-koreas-military-is-being-transformed-on-the-battlefields-of-ukraine-so-why-is-seoul-silent)

When North Korea fired multiple ballistic missiles from its eastern coast in May, South Korea’s response was swift. Within hours, Seoul joined Washington and Tokyo in condemning the launch as a “serious threat” to regional peace and security.

But just weeks earlier, when a North Korean KN-23 missile – designed to strike South Korean targets – hit a residential building in Kyiv, killing 12 civilians, Seoul said nothing.

That silence fits a broader pattern. There was no response when Russia reportedly deployed a surface-to-air missile system to protect Pyongyang, nor when Ukrainian intelligence revealed that Russian instructors were training North Korean drone pilots on home soil, even as Kim Jong-un voiced “unconditional support” for Moscow’s war.

Relations between the North and South, technically still at war, remain tense and the muted response has raised questions from analysts over whether Seoul fully grasps the consequences of what many see as North Korea’s most significant military transformation in decades – one shaped in real warfare, on the battlefields of Ukraine.

“We definitely should be alarmed,” says Chun In-bum, a former South Korean special forces commander. “But it’s just the nature of people to avoid catastrophe or be indifferent to the terrors of reality.”

According to Ukraine’s military intelligence agency, North Korea supplies 40% of all munitions used by Russia in its war against Kyiv. It has dramatically increased arms production at home, with Moscow paying Pyongyang directly.

In autumn last year, Pyongyang dispatched an estimated 12,000 troops to fight in Russia’s Kursk region. That deployment has since expanded significantly. An additional 6,000 soldiers are now joined by 1,000 military engineers, hundreds of railway engineers, bridge-building specialists, logistics personnel, electricians, military police, and even interpreters, focused largely on rebuilding the battle-scarred Kursk region, according to Ukrainian officials.

This military partnership with Moscow has been invaluable for Kim Jong-un’s regime, Maj Gen Vadym Skibitskyi, deputy head of Ukraine’s military intelligence agency, the HUR, told the Guardian.

“North Korea’s armed forces got new ammunition from Russia. Its soldiers gained experience of modern conflict. No other army in the region – Japan, South Korea and other countries – has participated in a modern war between two huge regular armies.”

The ideological commitment of their forces became clear when Ukraine captured two wounded North Korean prisoners in January.

“We were shocked by them. They were bio-robots. They tried to kill themselves by biting their own veins,” Skibitskyi says. When one was asked if he wanted to return home, he replied: “Yes, because I will be treated like a hero. I fought in a modern war.”

North Korean troops are learning about combined arms warfare and the operation of strike and reconnaissance drones, electronic warfare systems, and other technologies previously unfamiliar to them.

Moscow has transferred advanced weaponry and has helped upgrade the accuracy of North Korea’s KN-23 ballistic missiles, which have since targeted Ukrainian urban centres, including Kharkiv.

In June, the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, issued a pointed warning identifying South Korea directly: “This must be addressed now, not when thousands of upgraded Shahed drones and ballistic missiles begin to threaten Seoul and Tokyo.”

However, a mix of strategic, economic and political factors are discouraging more visible action from South Korea, says Dr Yang Uk, a defence expert at the Asan Institute for Policy Studies in Seoul.

Acknowledging North Korea’s military experience as a direct threat to Seoul would create pressure for a more robust domestic response, including potential weapons transfers to Ukraine that remain deeply unpopular in South Korea.

“Defence officials are particularly wary after December’s events,” Yang said, referring to the failed declaration of martial law by South Korean’s then president, Yoon Suk Yeol. “They’re really afraid of political attack and prefer to stay unseen by the public and press.”

Yang warns that Russia is working to integrate North Korea into its long-term defence supply chain – a partnership that could reshape Asia’s military balance long after the war ends.

Some analysts see Seoul’s silence as an extension of its longstanding “strategic ambiguity”: a reluctance to engage in foreign conflicts or unnecessarily alienate key powers, particularly those that might retain influence over Pyongyang.

Economic factors weigh heavily too. Prewar, Russia was one of South Korea’s top trading partners. Amid Donald Trump’s tariff threats, the new Lee Jae Myung government’s focus on economic recovery and “pragmatic diplomacy” leaves little appetite for confrontation.

Domestic politics also play a role. Lee’s Democratic party supports engagement with the North, reflecting how South Korea’s left-right divide centres more on North Korea policy than on western progressive values. Voices on the left argue South Korea owes Ukraine nothing.

Some of Seoul’s inertia may be bureaucratic. Chun points to procurement and planning processes that can take years, even as threats evolve within months.

“We are dealing with a level 10 super Godzilla,” he said. “But the bureaucracy only sees a tiger.”

North Koreans are already employing what they have learned in battle, he warns. “This should be a real wake-up call.”

Skibitskyi echoes that concern, suggesting South Korea’s military doctrine is outdated and modelled on a pre-drone era.

When asked by the Guardian whether it viewed North Korea’s deployments and combat experience in Ukraine as a security concern, South Korea’s defence ministry avoided addressing the implications directly.

“The participation of North Korean military personnel in the war in Ukraine constitutes a flagrant violation of the UN charter and relevant UN security council resolutions,” a spokesperson said. “The Republic of Korea strongly condemns such inhumane and unlawful acts in concert with the international community.”

Whether Seoul’s cautious approach reflects calculated long-term strategy or institutional paralysis remains unclear.

But for Chun, the warning signs are impossible to ignore.

“This is like a speeding train coming towards you,” he said. “You better move aside or start making preparations – while you still have time.”