---
layout: post
title:  "25年7月新闻摘选"
date:   2025-06-30 19:09:00 +0800
---

* 目录
  {:toc #markdown-toc}

#### [2025-06-26 China breaks more records with surge in solar and wind power](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/26/china-breaks-more-records-with-massive-build-up-of-wind-and-solar-power)

China’s installations of wind and solar in May are enough to generate as much electricity as Poland, as the world’s second-biggest economy breaks further records with its rapid buildup of renewable energy infrastructure.

China installed 93 GW of solar capacity last month – almost 100 solar panels every second, according to an analysis by Lauri Myllyvirta, a senior fellow at the Asia Society Policy Institute. Wind power installations reached 26 GW, the equivalent of about 5,300 **turbines**.

While estimates for the amount of power generated by solar panels and wind turbines vary depending on their location and weather conditions, Myllyvirta calculated that May’s installations alone could generate as much electricity as Poland, Sweden or the United Arab Emirates.

Between January and May, China added 198 GW of solar and 46 GW of wind, enough to generate as much electricity as Indonesia or Turkey.

“We knew China’s rush to install solar and wind was going to be wild but WOW,” Myllyvirta wrote on social media.

China’s installed solar photovoltaic capacity has now surpassed 1,000 GW for the first time, equivalent to half of the world’s total installed solar capacity.

The record numbers come as researchers and former government officials from the US are in Beijing to participate in unofficial climate talks.

Climate negotiations between the two superpowers have been fraught since Donald Trump entered the White House in January. Trump withdrew from many major environmental protection treaties, such as the Paris climate agreement which aims to limit global warming to well below two degrees **celsius** above preindustrial levels. The US president said at the time: “The United States will not sabotage its own industries while China pollutes with impunity.”

China is the world’s biggest emitter of **greenhouse gases** but is also the world’s biggest supplier and installer of clean energy technology.

Xi Jinping, China’s leader, is increasingly connecting China’s climate ambitions with the growth of the clean energy technology sector, which he sees as vital to boosting China’s **flagging** economy. In a speech in April, Xi highlighted the fact that in the past five years China has built “the world’s largest and most complete new energy industry chain”. The term new energy refers to renewables and supporting technology such as batteries.

But the **hyper-competitiveness** of China’s economy is also putting pressure on clean energy firms, with prices of solar panels barely covering the cost of production.

In the first quarter of this year, China’s five biggest solar companies reported a combined loss of over 8bn yuan, according to Bloomberg. At a recent conference, Yang Liyou, the general manager of Jinneng Technology, described the industry as being in a “death cycle”, according to Chinese media.

#### [2025-06-27 Top Chinese general ousted from body that oversees China’s military](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/27/top-chinese-general-miao-hua-ousted-from-body-that-oversees-china-military)

A top Chinese general has been dismissed from the body that oversees the Chinese military in the latest sign that Xi Jinping’s anti-corruption drive has reached the highest **echelons** of the armed forces.

Miao Hua, a senior admiral from the People’s Liberation Army (PLA) navy, was the director of the political work department of the central military commission (CMC), making him responsible for ideology and loyalty within the armed forces. The six-person CMC is one of the most powerful institutions in China and is headed by Xi himself.

On Friday, a statement from the Chinese government confirmed that Miao had been dismissed. He was suspended last year and placed under investigation for “serious violations of discipline”, a **byword** for corruption. He was expelled from the National People’s Congress, China’s parliament, in April.

The **dismissal** makes Miao one of the highest-ranking CMC officials to be purged since the 1960s, and the latest in a rush of senior military figures targeted.

He Weidong, a vice-chair of the CMC, is also reported to be under investigation.

The CMC is the governing body of the PLA, and oversees China’s coastguard. Xi is the chair of the CMC, as well as being the leader of China’s ruling Communist party (CCP) and the president.

Miao’s dismissal reflects the latest **ructions** in China’s armed forces. Beijing is keen to present an image of strength and stability on the world stage. The purges risk disrupting that image, although at a time when global attention is focused on wars in the Middle East and Ukraine, senior personnel changes in China’s military may garner less attention.

US-China military dialogue, seen as essential for avoiding accidental conflicts, particularly in the Taiwan strait, have been limited under the presidency of Donald Trump, who has also fired several senior military officials. US military representatives travelled to Shanghai for talks in April, but there have been no public signs of high-ranking meetings.

The US and Chinese defence ministers sometimes meet at the Shangri-la Dialogue, an annual defence forum which was held in Singapore last month. But this year China only sent a small, lower-ranking delegation.

In the past two years, Xi has dismissed two defence ministers, Li Shangfu and Wei Fenghe; two heads of the PLA’s rocket force, which is responsible for missiles and the nuclear arsenal, and two senior CMC officials. Senior aerospace and defence business leaders have also been removed from a CCP advisory body.

Many of the recent oustings appear to be related to an investigation into corruption in military **procurement**. Li, who was dismissed as defence minister in 2023 and expelled from the CCP last year, previously led the equipment procurement department. Several of his associates from the military and the equipment procurement department were also purged.

Miao is the eighth member of the CMC to be ousted since Xi took power in 2012. The expulsion of CMC members was previously unheard of since the era of Mao Zedong.

Xi took power with a promise to root out corruption in China, vowing to come after both the “tigers and the flies”. Since then, millions of officials have been investigated, and hundreds of thousands reportedly **penalised**, including high-profile people being expelled or **prosecuted**.

Having now ruled for more than a decade, however, many of the senior figures coming into the **crosshairs** of anti-corruption campaigns are people, such as Miao and Li, who Xi had personally appointed, raising questions about his ability to **vet** important appointments.

One of the most high-profile of Xi’s picks to fall was the former foreign minister Qin Gang. Qin disappeared from public view in June 2023, drawing global attention as one of China’s most public-facing officials. Speculation that he was under investigation ran **rampant** until October when Beijing announced he had been removed from his post. No reason was given.
