---
layout: post
title:  "25年10月新闻摘选"
date:   2025-10-09 09:38:00 +0800
---

<style type="text/css">
  pre code {
    white-space: pre-wrap;
    word-wrap: break-word;
    overflow-wrap: break-word;
  }
</style>

* 目录
{:toc #markdown-toc}

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/08/huajiang-grand-canyon-bridge-guizhou-china-worlds-highest-bridge-how-it-feels-crossing

As a safety worker for bungee jumps and rope **swings**, Mr Fu has spent a lot of time standing on bridges. But his new job, working at the new Huajiang Grand Canyon Bridge in Southern China, **takes the cake**.

“Standing on it yourself feels **thrilling** as well.”

The bridge offers bungee jumping and **slack**-lining, and there are plans for professional **Base jumping** events, according to state media.

Lin Guoquan, who runs a nearby **guesthouse**, posted on social media that his business was fully booked and there were now hundreds of people every day at a viewing platform where he used to drive guests.

Social media is **awash** with videos from the bridge, including drone vision shot by Lin

Not everyone is so **enamoured**.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/08/optimism-grows-for-gaza-peace-deal-as-top-us-qatari-and-turkish-officials-join-talks

“You need to approve a Truth Social post soon so you can announce deal first,” read the hand-scrawled note on White House **stationery**.

Though Hamas has agreed to three parts of Trump’s 20-point plan to end the war in Gaza – **namely** the release of all hostages in return for nearly 2,000 Palestinian prisoners, surrendering power in the strip and Israel’s withdrawal from Gaza – the rest of the deal still needs to be discussed.

Logistics of a hostage-prisoner swap still need to be **ironed out**.

The Trump administration and its Arab allies, as well as regional players such as Turkey, have thrown their **weight** behind the current round of peace talks in an effort to quickly push through a truce that has **evaded** negotiators for two years. Trump has said that he wants Israeli hostages to be released this week and has threatened Hamas with “total **obliteration**” if it does not agree to the deal.

The Israeli foreign minister, Gideon Saar, criticised the ministerial meeting for not including the country, describing it as being “**concocted** behind Israel’s back”. Saar said that he hoped the meeting would not **jeopardise** the release of hostages.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/08/almost-55000-children-in-gaza-acutely-malnourished-lancet-study-estimates

Almost 55,000 children in Gaza are estimated to be acutely **malnourished**, the respected international medical **periodical** has revealed.

The study offers a month-by-month **breakdown** through much of the two-year conflict.

In January 2024, 5% of children screened showed evidence of **wasting**, researchers found. After Israel imposed severe aid restrictions from the end of 2024, the **prevalence** of wasting had almost doubled by January 2025.

Dr Masako Horino is nutrition **epidemiologist** at Unrwa and lead scientist for the study.

“Tens of thousands of preschool aged children in the Gaza Strip are now suffering from **preventable** acute malnutrition and face an increased risk of **mortality**,” Horino said.

Leading child health experts and **paediatricians** said the study was particularly “notable and important”.

Bhutta also praised the researchers for using scientific evidence “to show **grievous**, preventable harm to children”.

“There should also be “serious concern” over its long-term health effects, which included “**inordinately** high risks of non-communicable diseases”, they added.

The study found that in Rafah, the southern city in Gaza, there was a fourfold increase in wasting malnutrition after Israel launched a massive offensive into the city and **levelled** it.

Unrwa has been accused by Benjamin Netanyahu of being “**perforated** by Hamas” and banned by Israel.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/09/putin-russian-air-defences-azerbaijani-jet-crash

Vladimir Putin has said that Russia’s air defences were to blame for downing an Azerbaijani **jetliner** in December that killed 38 people.

Aliyev, meanwhile, criticised Moscow for trying to “**hush** up” the incident.

The controversy over the crash has **roiled** the previously warm ties between Moscow and Baku. Their relations were further destabilised by deaths of ethnic Azerbaijanis **rounded up** by police in a Russian city in June.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/09/china-steps-up-control-rare-earth-exports-national-security-concerns

Foreign manufacturers using Chinese **machinery** or components overseas are now expected to seek permission, although it was unclear how that would be enforced.

“This has **adversely** affected international peace and stability” it said.

The supply of the globally crucial rare-earth elements has become a **contentious** point of trade negotiations between the US and China, tested in April when a first **swathe** of Chinese export restrictions.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/09/how-the-gaza-ceasefire-deal-was-done-donald-trump

It is a well-known **adage** in politics that success has many parents, but failure is an **orphan**.

The turning point was a meeting in New York on the sidelines of the UN general assembly chaired by Trump, soon after his **baroque** speech to the gathering.

That meant Trump dropping the **displacement** rhetoric he deployed earlier in the year, when he triggered widespread alarm by speaking of plans to develop a “Gaza Riviera”.

“People don’t want to hear this but the advantage of Trump is that once he decides to do something he is like a **juggernaut**.”

As a result Netanyahu, not a man prone to **contrition**, was ordered to apologise and say he would respect Qatar’s sovereignty in future.

The concept that Trump personally was central to a solution – indeed its guarantor – **flattered** the US president who offered himself up as the chair of the peace board, the body that would oversee the reconstruction of Gaza.

In one sense, he would be just a **name plate**, but to the extent he has a **hinterland**, it is construction.

The prospect of winning the Nobel peace prize, Trump’s **obsession**, hovered once more into view.

That meant that once his plan was published Trump did not let go, but kept the pressure up on Hamas, warning of the group’s **annihilation** if it did not release the hostages in return for 250 Palestinians.

It was the **seniority** of the negotiators who went to the talks in Egypt that revealed the **stars were finally aligning** and Hamas would be forced into releasing all the hostages it held.

During the talks, Hamas negotiators sought to clarify the names of the Palestinians to be released, **poring** over the maps showing a withdrawal of Israel’s forces.

He said: “You will see people **coexisting** and Gaza will be rebuilt.”

On the agenda are issues such as the future relationship between Gaza and the West Bank as the **nucleus** of a future Palestinian state.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/oct/10/trump-china-tariffs

Wall Street fell sharply after the US president reignited public tensions with the Chinese government, and raised the prospect of another **acrimonious** trade war between the world’s two largest economies.

This would happen on 1 November “or sooner”, he said, hinting that the move could be accelerated should Chinese officials **opt** to retaliate.

“There are many other countermeasures that are, **likewise**, under serious consideration.”

Trump repeatedly **hiked** US tariffs on Chinese goods in the spring.

But talks between officials, amid widespread concern over the impact of such **exorbitant** duties on the world economy, led to a fragile **detente**.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/11/china-issues-rewards-for-information-about-taiwan-militarys-psychological-warfare-unit

In a separate report, the state-controlled Chinese news agency Xinhua said they created **seditious** games to incite secession.

Taiwan’s defence ministry said the accusations reflected the “**despotic** and **pig-headed** thinking of an authoritarian regime.

“Defending national security and protecting the safety and wellbeing of the people is the **unshirkable** duty of every military officer and soldier,” it said.

On Friday, Lai Ching-te pledged greater efforts to boost Taiwan’s defences, calling on China to **renounce** the use of force to seize the island.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/11/nepal-gen-z-protests-one-month-on-slow-change

As his friend carried him to the nearby hospital, his bloodied **trainer** was left behind amid the **pandemonium**. A photograph of the shoe later went viral, an **evocative** symbol of the deadliest day of protest in Nepal’s history, with 19 protesters killed.

One month on, Bohora is still sitting in the **trauma** ward.

He saw friends killed and **maimed**.

Many of the young people who took to the streets on 8 September say they never intended to bring about **wholesale** regime change.

The lack of any high-profile arrests of former ministers from Oli’s government is a growing **bone** of contention.

Om Prakash Aryal said one of the interim government’s first moves had been to “remove the **obstructions** and disconnect the political links”.

In an **inflammatory** speech this week, Oli accused Karki and the gen Z protesters of **ulterior** motives.

Lok Raj Baral said that rather than casting blame, the gen Z uprising should be a moment of reckoning for Nepal’s political **old guard**.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/11/heavy-clashes-erupt-along-pakistan-afghanistan-border

“Exercising the right of self-defence, the alert armed forces of Pakistan repelled the assault decisively all along the border and **inflicted** heavy casualties on Taliban forces,” said the statement.

“We will not tolerate the **treacherous** use of Afghan soil for terrorism against Pakistan … the state of Pakistan will not rest until the **menace** of terrorism **emanating** from Afghanistan is completely eliminated.”

Pakistan has neither denied nor confirmed carrying out the Kabul strike, only stating that it had carried out “a series of **retribution** operations”.

The two countries share a nearly 1,600-mile (2,600km) **rugged** and mountainous border known as the Durand Line, which is **contested** by Afghanistan.

Gul described the clashes as a “logical conclusion of the tensions that had been **brewing** up between the two countries, particularly after the continuous refusal of the Afghan regime to take demonstrable **conclusive** action against the TTP, which is spearheading the terrorist attacks in Pakistan.”

Muttaqi said the situation along the Afghan-Pakistan border was now “under control” and that allies Qatar and Saudi Arabia had **reached out** to “express that the war should stop”.

He emphasised that while the cash-strapped Taliban in Afghanistan “lacks the capacity to fight the Pakistani military **head-on**”, he cautioned that the strikes could further fuel the cross-border militant insurgency in Pakistan.

“The risk is that its recent strikes in Afghanistan will galvanise TTP to carry out reprisals, which could **invite** further and perhaps more intense Pakistani operations in Afghanistan,” said Kugelman.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/12/philippines-says-chinese-ship-deliberately-rammed-government-boat-in-south-china-sea

The Philippines said a Chinese coast guard ship “fired its water cannon” at the BRP Datu Pagbuaya, a vessel belonging to Manila’s **fisheries** bureau, at 9.15am on Sunday.

Just three minutes later … the same Chinese vessel deliberately rammed the **stern**” of the Philippine boat.

Beijing blamed the Philippines for the **collision**.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/13/israeli-hostage-release-hamas-gaza-last-living

They said: “After more than 700 long, painful, and **agonizing** days, Omri will finally receive from his children Roni and Alma a healing embrace.

An estimate 65,000 people gathered at Hostages Square in Tel Aviv on Monday morning roared their **approval** as it was announced from a stage that the first seven live hostages had been released to the Red Cross.

Julie Kupershtein, the mother of hostage Bar Kupershtein, who was working at the Nova Music Festival as a **paramedic** when he was taken, spoke to him in a video call.

“We were in the compound, and suddenly I had a conversation, suddenly I saw Bar. I screamed to the sky. Crazy. To see them, these pure, **righteous** children, alive. I’m shaking **all over**.”

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/13/ukraine-war-briefing-moscow-voices-extreme-concern-at-trump-threat-to-send-tomohawk-missiles-to-kyiv

Trump has been **mulling** potential supplies of the long-range missiles to Kyiv via European allies ever since his meeting with Putin in Alaska in August failed to produce a peace deal. Trump said last week that he has “**sort of** made a decision” on whether to send Tomahawks to Ukraine, without elaborating.

Kyiv regional Governor Mykola Kalashnyk said two employees of Ukraine’s largest private energy company, DTEK, were wounded in Russian strikes on a **substation**.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/13/an-environment-of-terror-deadly-resurgence-of-pakistan-taliban-gathers-pace

Like Ahmed, his uncle was also in the police, a higher-ranking **constable** dedicated to his job, which supported his family of seven children.

“It seems they have a network of spies or **informants** who can tell them about local police who take part in raids on their camps.”

The TTP emerged in Pakistan’s **tribal**-dominated border areas around 2007, amid the US-led “war on terror”. After a long and brutal counter-insurgency operation, backed by the US, by 2015 Pakistan’s military had declared a “**phenomenal** success” in eradicating TTP militants from the mountainous border area.

The Taliban’s return to power in Afghanistan leaded many to fear a return to the horrors of the TTP **heyday** in the late 2000s.

The storming of the federal **constabulary** headquarters in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa that left six officers dead.

Militants walk openly in residential areas, where they take food from local people and are accused of **extorting** and holding businesses to **ransom**.

Nisar Ali said, the “militants **roam** freely. They ride bikes and **rickshaws** without any fear, not far from the military camps.”

“We see drones flying above our heads but most of the time they kill women, children and the elderly, even our **livestock**, but not the militants.”

A UN report last year accused the Taliban fighters of joining the TTP and the Taliban regime of giving regular aid packages to TTP fighters and a monthly financial **stipend** for its leader, Noor Wali Mehsud.

Muhammad Ali Saif said that this time round, the TTP militants were much more technologically well-equipped – using equipment  such as night-vision **goggles** and sniper weapons.

“If this **bad faith** persists, and this fight spreads to other provinces such as Punjab and Sindh, it will be catastrophic,” he said.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/13/hamas-deploys-armed-fighters-and-police-across-parts-of-gaza

Donald Trump suggested the militant Islamist organisation was acting within the **parameters** of the ceasefire deal.

**Simultaneously**, Israeli authorities began freeing about 2,000 prisoners, including 250 serving lengthy sentences.

Hundreds of trucks of aid and commercial goods have entered Gaza since Sunday, sending prices in markets **tumbling**.

Law and order has collapsed across much of Gaza, with armed families, **clans**, gangs, looters and militia growing more powerful.

“**Repent** before it is too late – there is no Hamas from today onward,” he said in a social media post.

One Hamas security official said a hunt was under way for Abu Shabab, adding that one of the fugitive leader’s aides had been “**liquidated**” in recent days.

But “the gate for **repentance** and general amnesty” was open for all those who joined “gangs” but were not involved in any murders.

Hamas flags and **headbands** were absent.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/13/venezuela-closes-embassy-in-oslo-after-opposition-leader-wins-nobel-peace-prize

“It is **regrettable**,” she said.

On Sunday, Maduro, without mentioning Machado’s prize, referred to the 58-year-old **laureate** as a “**demonic** witch”, a term often used by the government.

“We want peace, and we will have peace, but peace with freedom, with sovereignty,” Maduro said at an event commemorating the discovery of the Americas, celebrated in Venezuela as **Indigenous** Resistance Day.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/14/ukraine-war-briefing-crimea-oil-refinery-burns-as-russia-feels-effects-on-fuel-supply

An **oil terminal** at Feodosia was burning on Monday after an attack by Ukrainian drones. The drones hit at least five **reservoirs**.

Large **heat signatures** around the Feodosia terminal were visible on Nasa’s satellite fire monitoring service. Ukraine has launched more than 30 strikes on Russian energy sites since the beginning of August, triggering a **spike** in petrol prices inside Russia.

Russian forces attacked Kharkiv, Ukraine’s second-largest city, with **guided bombs** on Monday, local officials said.

The first **corps** of Ukraine’s national guard said it had **repelled** a new attempt by Russian forces to make advances near the town of Dobropillia.

 Martin Jaeger told lawmakers that Russia was determined to expand its “**sphere** of influence further westward into Europe”.

“We must not **sit back** and assume that a possible Russian attack would come in 2029 at the earliest,” Jaeger said. “We are already under fire today … The means Moscow uses are well known: airspace violations by drones and fighter jets, **contract killings**, persecution of opposition figures living abroad.”

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/14/released-israeli-hostages-speak-of-torture-torment-and-co-existence

Some described being tortured and **tormented**.

She could be seen screaming to him from a Hamas vehicle as he was walked away at **gunpoint**.

Omri Miran, 48, a father of two and **shiatsu** **massage** **therapist**, was held in 23 different places in Gaza.

“They covered him with black **sacks** and dragged him away.”

Other lies told by captors, she said, included the claim that his **maternal** grandparents – who are Holocaust survivors – were dead.

He believed that the captors were motivated to feed him following the international outcry over the video of an **emaciated** David being forced to dig his own grave.

The brothers, who work together as **lighting technicians**, gave a thumbs-up to the cameras on their release as they were driven away back home together.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/15/japans-imported-baby-boom-spotlights-a-political-and-demographic-timebomb

This week brought encouraging news for Japan’s long battle to **defuse** its demographic timebomb.

But none of the women who answered calls – **invariably** issued by conservative male politicians – to have more children were Japanese.

Japan’s foreign population is **edging** towards 4 million (3.2%).

Non-Japanese faces are no longer a **novelty** in towns and cities and, increasingly, in depopulated rural regions.

Previous descriptions of Japan as a modern-day **sakoku** nation of self-imposed isolation, whose leaders refuse to lower the **drawbridge** to all but a few foreign workers, is clearly out of date.

Its rise could – as some commentators suggested – be short-lived as voters, having **registered** their dissent, return to more mainstream parties.

A snap general election **notwithstanding**, Sanseito and its leader, Sohei Kamiya, will have to wait until 2028 to build on its successes this summer.

The governing Liberal Democratic party (LDP) has vowed to bring illegal immigration down to zero and ensure that guest workers do more to **integrate**.

During the LDP’s recent contest to elect a new leader, the winner, Sanae Takaichi, opened her campaign with a **broadside** against badly behaved foreign tourists.

At a ski resort in Hokkaido, locals are protesting against plans to build **lodgings** for more than 1,000 seasonal workers, many of whom are foreign.

While Japan’s employers have answered the migrant worker question in the **affirmative**, the choice between economic decline and a more diverse population is one the country’s politicians continue to dodge.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/15/china-spy-row-key-witness-statement-to-be-published-says-starmer

Keir Starmer was forced to promise to publish witness statements from the UK’s deputy national security adviser in an effort to **draw a line** under a row over why charges against two Britons accused of spying for China were dropped.

Starmer said at prime minister’s questions it was “absolutely not” the case and said Kemi Badenoch, the leader of the opposition, had made a “completely **scurrilous** allegation”.

Starmer turned his fire on the Tories, saying that “it was their failure and they are just **slinging** mud”.

Starmer added that Collins was a “civil servant of the utmost **integrity**” and that his witness statement had been made without political input.

“He had to be dragged out to repeat only more **obfuscation**.”

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/15/dozens-killed-afghanistan-pakistan-border-taliban-kurram-chaman-spin-boldak-kandahar-kabul

Pakistan rebuffed the claim as “**outrageous** and blatant lies”.

The heaviest casualties on Pakistan’s side were reported around the city of Chaman, which is just a few miles from the border and bore the **brunt** of heavy shelling from the Afghan side.

The resumption of the deadly clashes and airstrikes has pushed the two once-**amicable** neighbours the closest to conflict with each other in years and has sparked fears of wider regional instability.

However, ties between the two have severely deteriorated as Islamabad has accused Kabul of giving **sanctuary** to the Pakistan Taliban, known as Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP).

The violence **flared** up again on Tuesday night.

“We are trying to help people to **vacate** and shift to safer places,” he said.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/15/xi-directs-quashing-of-chinese-feminists-even-as-he-praises-advances-at-womens-conference

In the past 30 years, women were now participating in the project of national governance with “unprecedented confidence and **vigour**”.

The leader has overseen a sweeping crackdown on civil society and led a **patriarchal** turn in politics. In 2022 he unveiled a new **politburo**, which for the first time since 1997 included no women.

The government routinely **exhorts** women to fulfil what it says are traditional responsibilities of marriage and child-bearing.

It came a few weeks after more than 1,300 accounts on Weibo were given temporary or permanent bans for inciting “gender **antagonism**”.

In June, the platform launched a **dedicated** **complaints** category for reporting content that “promotes gender antagonism”.

Wang Huiling, a vlogger from rural Anhui province, shot to **fame** during the Covid-19 pandemic. Her experience of coming from a village, where social norms are more conservative, stood in contrast to the more middle-class feminist **discourse** from China’s cities.

But Wang’s **precise** reach in China is now hard to gauge because, in January, all of her social media accounts were deleted without explanation.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/16/us-stakes-rare-earths-companies-tackle-china-power

“China’s announcement on export controls is **nothing more than** a global supply chain power grab,” he said.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/17/china-accuses-uk-of-bad-faith-over-delayed-embassy-project

Lin Jian, a spokesperson for the Chinese foreign ministry, told a press conference in Beijing on Friday that the UK had shown “disregard for **contractual** spirit, acting in bad faith and without integrity”.

He said China had acted with “the utmost sincerity and patience” and the UK should “immediately fulfil its obligations and **honour** its commitments otherwise the British side shall bear all consequences”.

The prime minister’s spokesperson told reporters on Friday that the decision over the embassy was **quasi**-judicial and “independent of the rest of government”.

Oliver Robbins, the head of the Foreign Office, is in China this week discussing the embassy application and the **refurbishments** Britain wants to carry out on its own embassy in Beijing.

But those attempts have faced multiple **hurdles**, including the two recent rows over spying and the proposed new embassy.

Beijing bought the site of the **prospective** embassy near the Tower of London for £255m in 2018. Tower Hamlets council refused permission for the project in 2022, prompting **wrangling** over whether it could go ahead.

That deadline was pushed back until 21 October after China **redacted** large portions of its plans for what it said were security reasons.

Meanwhile, reports suggest Beijing has been accessing **classified** material on British servers for several years, renewing concerns that it could use the new embassy to bolster its surveillance efforts.

Western said the proposed location posed “**eavesdropping** risks in peacetime and sabotage risks in a crisis” **owing to** its proximity to fibre-optic cables, datacentres and telecoms exchanges serving Canary Wharf and the City.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/20/trump-zelenskyy-ukraine-donbas-region-end-russia-invasion

“The rest is very tough to negotiate if you’re going to say, ‘You take this, we take that,’” he said. “You know, there are so many different **permutations**.”

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/20/european-leaders-near-deal-to-use-frozen-russian-assets-for-ukraine

Under the plan – **sketched** out in a two-page document by the European Commission last month – the EU would give a €140bn interest-free loan to Ukraine based on the Russian frozen assets held at the Euroclear finance agency.

Belgium hosts €183bn of frozen assets at Brussels-based Euroclear, and has called for detailed guarantees that it will not be left alone with the bill, if the scheme collapses, triggering a slew of **legal claims**.

In an FT opinion article, Merz wrote that “a new **impetus** to change Russia’s calculations” was needed.

But lawyers at the Council of Ministers, which represents member states, are **dubious** about the legality of the move, which would shift sanctions to a majority vote, rather than a unanimous one.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/19/north-korean-soldier-defects-south-across-heavily-fortified-border

A North Korean soldier has **defected** to South Korea across the rivals’ heavily **fortified** border, South Korea’s military has said.

Despite its official name, the demilitarised zone, the 248km (155-mile)long and 4km (2.5-mile) wide border is guarded by landmines, tank traps, **barbed** wire fences and combat troops.

A vast majority of about 34,000 North Koreans who have fled to South Korea since the end of the 1950-53 Korean war came via China, which shares a long, **porous** border with North Korea.

Relations between the two Koreas remain strained, with North Korea repeatedly rejecting **outreach** by South Korea’s liberal president, Lee Jae Myung, who took office in June with a vow to improve relations between the countries.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/21/australia-us-critical-minerals-rare-earths-deal-china-explainer

Here are five key **takeaways**.

The first is a proposed **gallium** plant in Western Australia, to be co-located at one of Alcoa’s alumina refineries.

The US is wholly dependent on gallium imports, with China having near complete dominance over its production – it is typically **churned** out as a **byproduct** by the country’s vast network of aluminium **smelters**.

Like much of the critical mineral supply chain, China **priced out** rival gallium producers over several decades until it achieved its monopoly position.

Rare-earth magnets are used in wind turbines, medical devices, **combustion** and electric motors and ballistic missile guidance systems.

The US government is considering investing up to $US300m, but first requires further **due diligence**.

Tim Buckley says it is urgent to position Australia as “more than a **quarry** digging and shipping our raw commodities”.

The mix of government money and public **shareholder** money raises questions over who the projects will sell to, and at what price, given China is the world’s dominant buyer of materials that go into the production of high-grade magnets.

One representative of a critical minerals project told Guardian Australia the company was “**mindful** of the context in which we’ve been funded” and that there’s an assumption they “won’t be making many sales to Chinese customers”.

Australian critical minerals companies have enjoyed a **stellar** several weeks, with share prices rocketing amid hopes a new mineral boom has taken hold.

There is also the **lingering** question over how China will respond.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/21/myanmar-kk-park-raid-scam-cybercrime-centre-compound

According to a report in Monday’s Myanma Alinn newspaper, Myanmar’s army raided KK Park, a **well-documented** cybercrime centre.

The army **ascertained** that more than 260 buildings were unregistered.

These usually involve gaining victims’ confidence online with romantic **ploys** and bogus investment pitches.

The centres are infamous for recruiting workers from other countries under false **pretences**.

Scam operations were in the international spotlight last week when the United States and Britain enacted sanctions against the alleged organisers of a major Cambodian cyberscam gang, and its alleged **ringleader** was **indicted** by a federal court in New York.

The company could not be immediately reached for comment Monday but its policy bans “conduct that is defamatory, **fraudulent**, **obscene**, or **deceptive**”.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/22/ukraine-war-briefing-storm-shadow-missiles-hit-gunpowder-plant-in-russia

“A massive combined missile and airstrike was carried out, including with air-launched Storm Shadow missiles that **penetrated** Russia’s air defence system,” said Ukraine’s armed forces general staff.

Plans for a summit between Donald Trump and Vladimir Putin in Budapest have been **shelved**. “And I assume Lavrov gave the same **spiel**, and Rubio was like: ‘See you later’.” Another European diplomat thought that “it became **evident** for the Americans that there will be no deal for Trump in Budapest”.

Volodymyr Zelenskyy said Russia “almost **automatically** became less interested in diplomacy” once US Tomahawk missiles for Ukraine were no longer an immediate prospect.

Another said it would be **modelled** on the US 20-point plan on Gaza.

For example, a proposal to **siphon** off some of Russia’s frozen assets to fund a portion of reparations payments to Ukraine “would be a non-starter for Russia”, one diplomat said.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/22/british-woman-bali-execution-drug-smuggling-repatriated-lindsay-sandiford-

A British woman will avoid execution for drug smuggling in Indonesia under an agreement between the two nations to repatriate her and another Briton serving a **life sentence**.

She was arrested at the resort island’s airport after authorities found 3.8kg of cocaine worth $2.5m hidden in the **lining** of her suitcase.

She was sentenced to die by **firing squad** and Indonesia’s highest court upheld it in 2013.

Another prisoner, Shahab Shahabadi, 35, has been serving a life sentence since 2014. He was arrested in **Jakarta** as a result of an investigation into an international drug trafficking network.

She is seriously ill and is 68 years old,” said secretary of state for foreign and **commonwealth** affairs Yvette Cooper.

They included a Filipina who faced the death penalty for drugs and five Australians **convicted** of heroin trafficking.

About 530 people are on **death row** in Indonesia, mostly for drug-related crimes, including nearly 100 foreigners.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/21/sanae-takaichi-japan-first-female-pm-appoints-two-women-to-cabinet

Takaichi, an ultra-conservative whose Liberal Democratic party (LDP) has formed a coalition with a minor party that shares her hawkish approach to defence and **revisionist** views on wartime history, has said she wants to raise awareness of women’s health and has spoken about her own experience of **menopause**.

But like her political hero Margaret Thatcher, Takaichi will be guided by the social conservatism that made her the popular choice among MPs and **rank-and-file** members on the right of the LDP when she ran for the party leadership this month.

She opposes revising a 19th-century law requiring married couples to use the same surname, arguing that allowing women to retain their **maiden** names would **chip away** at traditional family values.

She also opposes calls for changes to succession laws to allow female members of the **imperial household** – which has few male heirs – to become **reigning** **empresses**.

Takaichi had a **comparatively** small pool of female MPs from which to appoint her cabinet.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/23/south-korea-monster-missile-hyunmoo-5-balance-power-north

South Korea is a **signatory** to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Hyunmoo-5 is a conventional missile.

The idea for the missile was first **conceived** after a series of deadly attacks by North Korea in 2010.
    
However, development of the Hyunmoo-5 was blocked by US restrictions on South Korean missile payloads until 2017, when Donald Trump lifted those limits following North Korea’s **hydrogen** bomb test.

Pyongyang has **snubbed** Seoul since President Lee Jae Myung took office in June, despite Lee’s peace overtures.

He has criticised what he calls the “**submissive** mindset” of those who believe South Korea cannot defend itself without foreign military support.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/22/cuba-arrests-zhi-dong-zhang-chinese-fentanyl-kingpin

Zhi Dong Zhang will remain in Cuba awaiting a decision on his possible **extradition**, the sources added.

Washington under Donald Trump has been applying pressure on Mexico and China to curb drug trafficking, particularly of fentanyl: the powerful **painkiller** behind an overdose epidemic in the US.

It has largely replaced heroin and **prescription** opioids like oxycodone as a cause of overdoses in the US.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/23/ukraine-war-briefing-ukrainians-may-get-gripen-fighter-jets-bought-with-russian-money

The Gripen has long been **vaunted** as more practical for Ukrainian battlefield conditions.

It will bring forward a ban on the import of **liquefied** natural gas from Russia by a year to the start of 2027.

Tymur Tkachenko said drones had damaged several **dwellings** and other buildings, including a kindergarten.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/23/will-us-sanctions-russia-oil-companies-be-effective-why-trump-now

It will **come down to** how aggressively the US enforces them.

But since returning to the White House, he has found the task more difficult than he **envisioned**. His commitment to the war has **flip flopped**.

Additional sanctions will help to further **constrict** Rosneft and Lukoil’s ability to do business, placing further pressure on Putin.

Thomas Graham, a fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations, was more **circumspect**, telling Bloomberg: “If the White House thinks this is going to lead to **radical** change in the Kremlin’s conduct or Putin’s policy, they’re **deluding** themselves …”

Experts say that Trump’s campaign promise to keep petrol prices low and manage the cost of living crisis could **dilute** the impact of the new sanctions, if they start to dramatically affect the oil price.

Efforts to secure Tomahawk missiles at a White House meeting last week were **dashed** after Trump held a phone call with Putin.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/23/marco-rubio-warning-israel-west-bank-donald-trump

A bill applying Israeli law to the occupied West Bank, a move **tantamount** to the annexation of land Palestinians want for a state, won **preliminary** approval from Israel’s parliament on Wednesday.

Defying Netanyahu’s warnings – he had also urged MPs from his Likud party to **abstain** – shouting **erupted** in the Knesset during the vote.

Since then, successive governments have tried to permanently **cement** Israeli control over the land.

In August, Israel approved a long-delayed settlement project, **bisecting** the territory and further undermining hopes for a viable Palestinian state.

Construction in the so-called E1 area has been stalled for more than two decades amid international opposition, but a defence ministry committee gave the **go-ahead** for 3,400 homes.

Video footage of the attack shows the man striking her unconscious with a stick before hitting her again as she lay **motionless** on the ground.

Meanwhile, on Thursday Israel’s supreme court held a hearing into whether to open the Gaza Strip to the international media, giving the state 30 days to present a new position **in light of** the ceasefire.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/oct/23/putin-says-he-will-never-bow-to-us-but-concedes-sanctions-may-cause-some-losses

Vladimir Putin has said Russia will never bow to US pressure but **conceded** new sanctions could cause some economic pain.

The measures are aimed at **choking off** the vital oil revenues that fund the Kremlin’s war machine.

“**Recalibration** of Russian oil imports is ongoing,” a spokesperson told Reuters.

Several sources also told Reuters that China’s state-owned oil companies have suspended purchases of **seaborne** Russian crude, at least in the short-term, amid concerns about **falling foul of** the new sanctions.

**Compliance** with the sanctions would mean giving up access to the cut-price Russian crude.

The two **outfits** are the most economically significant Chinese listings by the EU to date.

Dmitry Medvedev, known for his increasingly **belligerent** rhetoric, described the measures as an “act of war”.

“The US is our enemy,” he wrote on social media. “Its talkative ‘peacemaker’ has now fully **embarked** on a path of war against Russia.”

The network has enabled Russia to sustain oil exports to key customers in India and China despite the G7 price cap and EU **embargo**.
