---
layout: post
title:  "25年6月新闻摘选"
date:   2025-06-03 09:29:00 +0800
---

* 目录
{:toc #markdown-toc}

#### [2025-06-01 Ukraine launches major drone attack on Russian bombers, security official says](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/01/ukraine-launches-major-drone-attack-on-russian-bombers-security-official-says)

Ukraine has launched a “large-scale” drone attack against Russian military **bombers** in Siberia, striking more than 40 warplanes thousands of miles from its own territory, a security official has said, after it **smuggled** the drones to the **perimeter** of the airfields hidden in the roofs of wooden **sheds**.

On the eve of peace talks, the drone attack on four separate airfields was part of a sharp ramping up of the three-year war, with Russia launching waves of drones at Ukraine, while Moscow said sabotage was to blame for two train derailments that left seven people dead.

Video from several military airfields across Russia showed destroyed aircraft and planes **engulfed** in flames, though the full extent of the damage remained unclear.

Among the more than 40 aircraft reportedly hit were Tu-95 and Tu-22 strategic bombers, which Russia uses to fire long-range missiles at Ukrainian cities.

Ukraine’s SBU domestic intelligence agency said it had hit Russian military planes worth a **combined** $7bn (£5.2bn) in the wave of drone strikes.

If the extent of the damage is confirmed, the attack would mark Ukraine’s most damaging drone strike of the war to date, amid an escalation in cross-border incursions before a new round of direct negotiations in Istanbul on Monday.

A Ukrainian official provided video footage to media reportedly showing the strikes, in which Reuters said several large aircraft that appeared to be Tu-95 bombers were on fire. The Tu-95 was originally developed to carry nuclear bombs and now launches cruise missiles.

Several Russian and Ukrainian media outlets reported that Ukraine carried out the operation by launching drones from lorries parked near military airfields deep inside Russia.

Ukrainian officials told the media that the operation – codename “Spiderweb” – had been in preparation for more than 18 months. The drones were first smuggled into Russia and later **concealed** under the roofs of small wooden sheds which were loaded on to trucks and driven to the perimeter of the airbases. The roof panels of the sheds were lifted off by a remotely activated mechanism, allowing the drones to fly out and begin their attack, the official said.

Media reports said Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, had personally **overseen** the sophisticated operation.

On Sunday evening he thanked everyone involved, adding: “We had been preparing the operation for more than a year and a half. Planning, organisation, all the details were perfectly prepared. I can say for sure that this is a completely unique operation.”

He said that the office of Ukraine’s operation in Russia had been located “right next to the FSB office in one of (Russia’s) regions”.

“In total, 117 drones were used in the operation. And a corresponding number of drone operators were working,” he said. “Thirty-four per cent of the strategic cruise missile carriers at the airfields were hit. Our people were operating in different Russian regions – in three time zones. And our people were withdrawn from the territory of Russia on the eve of the operation, and now they are safe – those who helped us.”

Photographs from Ukrainian security officials showed dozens of short-range **quadcopter** drones piled up in an industrial facility. Other images showed the wooden sheds with their metal roofing panels removed, and the drones sitting in the **cavities** between roof **beams**.

A separate video posted on Russian Telegram channels appeared to show matching sheds on the back of a truck with the roof panels lying on the ground and at least two drones rising out of the top of the sheds and flying off.

Mash, a Telegram channel with links to Russia’s security services, published footage that appeared to show men in Siberia’s Irkutsk region climbing on to one of the lorries in an attempt to prevent drones from launching.

In one clip, filmed at the burning airbase in Olenegorsk in the Murmansk region, a Russian service person is heard saying: “It’s fucked here,” as several bombers burn in the background.

Since the full-scale invasion began in February 2022, Ukraine has been **chronically** outgunned by Russia in terms of military firepower. But it has developed a **nimble** and **sizeable** fleet of attack drones used to strike Russia’s army and energy infrastructure.

The Belaya airbase targeted on Sunday in Irkutsk oblast is more than 2,500 miles (4,000km) from Ukraine.

The Russian defence ministry confirmed that several of its military aircraft “caught fire” in the attack in the regions of Murmansk and Irkutsk. It added that there were no casualties and that several “participants” had been arrested.

In March, Ukraine said it had developed a new drone with a range of 3,000km, without providing further details.

Earlier on Sunday, Russian investigators said they believed “explosions” had caused two bridges in the border regions of Kursk and Bryansk to collapse overnight, derailing trains and killing at least seven people and injuring dozens. No one has claimed responsibility.

Russian investigators were investigating the bridge blasts as “acts of terrorism”, according to state media. The Kremlin said the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, had been briefed throughout the night.

Separately, tracks on the Unecha-Zhecha section of railway in Russia’s Bryansk region were damaged without casualties, the national operator, Russian Railways, said.

Russia has been hit by dozens of sabotage attacks since Moscow launched its offensive against Ukraine in 2022, many targeting its vast railway network. Kyiv says railways are targeted because they transport troops and weaponry.

Meanwhile, the Ukrainian air force said Russia had launched 472 drones overnight, the highest nightly total of the war so far, as well as seven missiles. Ukraine’s army said at least 12 Ukrainian service members were killed and more than 60 were injured in a Russian missile strike on an army training unit.

Ukraine had previously refused to **commit to** attending a new round of direct talks in Turkey but on Sunday Zelenskyy said a delegation led by his defence minister, Rustem Umerov, would be in Istanbul. “I have also defined our position before the Monday meeting in Istanbul,” which includes priorities to reach “a complete and unconditional ceasefire” and the return of prisoners and abducted children, Zelenskyy said on social media.

The US president, Donald Trump, has put pressure on both sides to end the war and threatened to walk away if they do not, potentially leaving Kyiv entirely dependent on European aid.

Reuters reported Ukrainian negotiators in Istanbul would present a **proposed** plan for reaching a lasting peace settlement, with the current frontline as the starting point for negotiations about territory.

Citing a copy of the document **laying out** the Ukrainian position, it said there would be no future restrictions on Ukraine’s military strength, no international recognition of Russian sovereignty over parts of Ukraine taken by Moscow’s forces, and **reparations** for Ukraine.

Last year, Putin set out his opening **terms** for an immediate end to the war, demanding Ukraine drop its Nato membership ambitions and withdraw all of its troops from all four Ukrainian regions claimed and mostly controlled by Russia.

#### [2025-06-01 China accuses Pete Hegseth of sowing division in Asia in speech ‘filled with provocations’](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/01/china-accuses-pete-hegseth-of-sowing-division-in-asia-in-speech-filled-with-provocations)

China’s government has accused Pete Hegseth of trying to “sow division” in the Asia Pacific region over his speech at a Singapore defence conference where he warned China was a potentially “imminent” threat.

On Saturday Hegseth said China was “**credibly** preparing to potentially use military force to alter the balance of power in the Indo-Pacific”, and was rehearsing for “the **real deal**” of invading Taiwan.

“There’s no reason to **sugar coat** it. The threat China **poses** is real, and it could be imminent,” the US defence secretary said in a keynote address at the Shangri-la Dialogue defence forum, calling for Asian countries to increase defence spending.

On Sunday, China’s ministry of foreign affairs condemned his words, which it said were “filled with provocations and intended to sow division”.

“Hegseth deliberately ignored the call for peace and development by countries in the region, and instead touted the cold war mentality for bloc confrontation, **vilified** China with **defamatory** allegations, and falsely called China a ‘threat’,” it said.

“The remarks were filled with provocations and intended to sow division. China deplores and firmly opposes them and has protested strongly to the US.”

The statement also pushed back at Hegseth’s claim that China was trying to become a “hegemonic power” in the region.

“No country in the world deserves to be called a hegemonic power other than the US itself, who is also the primary factor undermining the peace and stability in the Asia-Pacific,” it said.

The ministry accused Hegseth of “playing with fire” with what it calls “the Taiwan question”. China’s ruling Communist party (CCP) claims Taiwan is a province of China, illegally run by separatists, and has vowed to annex it. Taiwan’s democratically elected government and the majority of its people reject the prospect of CCP rule.

Speaking to reporters on Sunday morning, Australia’s defence minister, Richard Marles, rejected the **premise** of China’s criticism of Hegseth.

“What we have seen from China is the single biggest increase in military capability and buildup in a **conventional sense** by any country since the end of the second world war,” he said.

“That is one of the key features of the **complexity** of the strategic landscape which all of us face within the region and which is faced around the world.”

Marles said Australia had worked with regional partners including the US and the Philippines “over a long period of time to uphold the global rules-based order”, including freedom of navigation operations to assert the UN convention on the law of the sea.

The US is not a **signatory** to that convention.

The Shangri-la Dialogue is an annual conference that hosts dozens of leaders, defence ministers and military chiefs from around the world, for three days of panel discussions and speeches. But much of the significant interactions occur on the sidelines, with private meetings between representatives. Past years have often seen the US and China trade **barbs**, but also occasionally hold significant meetings, including last year with China’s defence minister, Dong Jun, and Hegseth’s predecessor, Lloyd Austin.

This year, however, China sent only a small delegation led by a vice-president of the People’s Liberation Army’s national defence university, **Rear Adm** Hu Gangfeng.

On Saturday afternoon Hu told a panel, which included the head of the British armed forces, that speakers had attempted to “provoke, split and instigate confrontations in the region” with criticisms of China.

He said the maritime situation in the region was “generally stable” but faced “severe challenges”, and accused unnamed countries of increasing military presences and infringing on territorial sovereignty of others “in the name of so-called freedom of navigation” and supporting “Taiwan independence separatist forces”.

China claims much of the South China Sea, where there are overlapping claims of sovereignty among several countries. It has rejected a ruling by The Hague that its claims are unlawful.

Later on Sunday, Singapore’s defence minister, Chan Chun Sing, told a panel that it was crucial China and the world properly understand each other. Referencing China’s absence, Chan said Beijing should use “every opportunity” available to **get** its position **across**.

“But **regardless of** whether China attends the dialogue, it is **incumbent** on all of us to reach out to China in different forums … to not end up in a situation where either side **misinterprets**, miscalculates, or **misrepresents** each other’s position. That is dangerous.”

#### [2025-06-03 Lee Jae-myung wins election as South Korean president](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/03/lee-jae-myung-elected-as-south-korean-president-exit-polls-say)

Liberal candidate Lee Jae-myung has won the vote to become South Korea’s new president after a **snap election** triggered by a brief period of martial law imposed by the now-impeached former leader, Yoon Suk Yeol.

With 100% of the ballots counted, Lee won 49.42% of nearly 35 million **votes cast**, while his conservative rival Kim Moon-soo had taken 41.15%, according to national election commission data, which said **turnout** was the highest for a presidential election since 1997.

Speaking outside his home, Lee thanked voters for placing their trust in him.

“I will do my utmost to fulfil the great responsibility and mission entrusted to me, so as not to disappoint the expectations of our people,” he told reporters. He said he would not forget the duty of a president to unite the people.

Lee, a 61-year-old former human rights lawyer who had made two failed attempts to become president, rode a wave of public anger that followed Yoon’s declaration of martial law in early December.

The order, which was overturned in **a matter of** hours, sparked South Korea’s biggest political crisis in decades. The country is also battling an economic downturn, income inequality and doubts over the US’s commitment to its security under Donald Trump.

Kim, however, struggled to win over moderate swing voters while his People Power party **feuded** over how to view Yoon’s legacy.

Turnout was high, at 77.8% an hour before the polls closed, surpassing the figure recorded in the previous presidential election in 2022, according to the national election commission. More than a third of the 44.39 million eligible voters had cast their ballots in early voting last Thursday and Friday.

Some South Koreans view the election, called after the constitutional court upheld Yoon’s impeachment in early April, as evidence that their democracy is in good health. In a Facebook message on Tuesday, Lee had cast the election as voters’ opportunity to “save South Korea, which is in crisis due to the greed of the establishment”.

But the division unleashed by Yoon is expected to follow Lee into his single five-year term, which begins on Wednesday without the traditional two-month transition period.

Large crowds have taken to the streets in recent months to denounce or support Yoon, whose suspension, and then removal, left a leadership vacuum that shook the country’s diplomatic activities and financial markets.

“The economy has gotten so much worse since December … Not just for me but I hear that from everybody,” said Kim Kwang-ma, an 81-year-old voter. “And we as a people have become so **polarised** … I wish we could come together so that Korea can develop again.”

Lee, a **frontrunner** since the start of the campaign, will face several major challenges, including a slowing economy, Trump’s trade war and the nuclear threat posed by North Korea.

In his final campaign speeches on Monday, Lee promised to revitalise the economy, reduce inequality and ease national divisions.

Kim, a former labour minister under Yoon, warned that a **victorious** Lee would abuse his powers to retaliate against his political opponents and use his party’s majority in the national assembly to protect him in several court cases that will resume after the election.

Lee “is now trying to seize all power in South Korea and establish a Hitler-like dictatorship”, Kim told a rally in the south-eastern city of Busan.

Lee, who headed the opposition-led campaign to oust Yoon, is a highly **divisive** figure in South Korean politics. He faces criminal trials including charges of bribery and alleged involvement in a property development scandal.

Courts agreed to postpone further hearings of continuing trials until after the election, allowing him to contest the presidency while the cases remained unresolved. Lee denies all charges, describing them as politically motivated persecution.

Lee, who grew up in a poor household and worked in factories as a child, has shown a more cautious side in recent speeches, despite his reputation as a radical reformer determined to take on the country’s conservative establishment.

He has promised to be pragmatic in foreign affairs, committing himself to South Korea’s alliance with the US and vowing to continue Seoul’s partnership with Washington and Tokyo, mirroring the policies of his conservative predecessor.

But he wants to move away from Yoon’s **confrontational** approach towards North Korea and re-engage with the South’s nuclear-armed neighbour. He has conceded, though, that it will be “very difficult” to quickly resume summits with the North’s leader, Kim Jong-un.

#### [2025-06-04 World won’t forget Tiananmen Square, US and Taiwan say on 36th anniversary of massacre](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/04/world-wont-forget-tiananmen-square-us-and-taiwan-say-on-36th-anniversary-of-massacre)

The world will never forget the Tiananmen Square massacre, the US secretary of state and Taiwan president have said on the 36th anniversary of the crackdown, which China’s government still tries to erase from domestic memory.

There is no official death toll but activists believe hundreds, possibly thousands, were killed by China’s People’s Liberation Army in the streets around Tiananmen Square, Beijing’s central plaza, on 4 June 1989.

“Today we commemorate the **bravery** of the Chinese people who were killed as they tried to exercise their fundamental freedoms, as well as those who continue to suffer persecution as they seek accountability and justice for the events of June 4, 1989,” said Marco Rubio, the US’s top diplomat, in a statement.

“The Chinese Communist party actively tries to censor the facts, but the world will never forget.”

In a Facebook post, Taiwan’s president, Lai Ching-te, also praised the bravery of the protesters.

“Authoritarian governments often choose to silence and forget history, while democratic societies choose to preserve the truth and refuse to forget those who gave their lives – and their dreams – to the idea of human rights,” Lai said.

Ahead of the 1989 massacre protesters had been gathering for weeks in the square to call for democratic reforms to the CCP. The student-led movement attracted worldwide attention, which turned to horror as tanks rolled into the square to clear the encampment. Several protesters were also killed at a smaller demonstration in Chengdu, a city in south-west China.

The date of 4 June remains one of China’s strictest **taboos**, and the Chinese government employs extensive and increasingly sophisticated resources to censor any discussion or acknowledgment of it inside China. Internet censors scrub even the most obscure references to the date from online spaces, and activists in China are often put under increased surveillance or sent on enforced “holidays” away from Beijing.

New research from human rights workers has found that the sensitive date also sees heightened **transnational** **repression** of Chinese government critics overseas by the government and its proxies.

The report published on Wednesday by Article 19, a human rights research and **advocacy** group, said that the Chinese government “has engaged in a systematic international campaign of transnational repression targeting protesters critical of the Chinese Communist party,” with Uyghurs, Tibetans and Hongkongers particularly likely to be affected.

The report cited Freedom House research in 2023, which found that China had been responsible for about 30% all recorded acts of physical transnational repression since 2014.

“Protesters targeted by transnational repression frequently live in fear of surveillance; targeting; abduction and forced **repatriation**, especially around embassies and consulates; and ‘collective punishment’ retaliation against relatives still in China, which also leads people to cut ties with their family,” the report said.

The Article 19 researchers found that, with Tiananmen Square **vigils** **snuffed** out in China, pro-CCP agents appear to be targeting commemorations in other parts of the world.

In 2022, a **replica** of a statue known as the “Pillar of Shame”, by Danish artist Jens Galschiøt, was **vandalised** in Taipei. The statue is designed to memorialise the people who died on 4 June 1989. The original was on display at the University of Hong Kong for 23 years before it was removed by university authorities in 2021.

For many years, Hong Kong, and to a lesser extent Macau, were the only places on Chinese territory where the event could be commemorated.

But since the 2019 pro-democracy protests and the **ensuing** crackdown on civil liberties in Hong Kong, the annual 4 June vigil in Victoria Park has been banned. In recent years some high profile activists have been **prosecuted** over attempts to mark the day. For the last three years a government-sponsored food **carnival** has been held on the site during the week of the anniversary.

On Tuesday there was a heavy police presence in Causeway Bay, near the park, Hong Kong Free Press reported. A performance artist, Chan Mei-tung, was stopped and searched, and later **escorted** from the area by police. She was standing on the road chewing gum, according to the outlet. In 2022 Chan was arrested on after she stood in the same area peeling a potato.

On Tuesday Hong Kong’s chief executive, John Lee, warned that any activity conducted on Wednesday must be “lawful”, but was not specific. A key criticism of Hong Kong’s national security laws are that they are broad and the **proscribed** crimes are ill-defined.

One of the few groups of people in China who are still outspoken about the events of 36 years ago are the rapidly ageing “Tiananmen Mothers”, parents of young people killed in the massacre, who have called for an official **reckoning**.

One of the founding members, 88-year-old Zhang Xianling, gave a rare interview this year with Radio Free Asia, saying that she still lives under close surveillance. Zhang said: “I don’t know why they are so afraid of me. I am 88 years old and I have to use a wheelchair if I can’t walk 200 metres. Am I that scary?”

Earlier this week Li Xiaoming, an ex-PLA officer who has lived in Australia for 25 years, gave an interview to Taiwan media, about his involvement at the Tiananmen crackdown as a junior soldier. Li said he was **compelled** to talk “as a warning to the world”, and also to Taiwan which is facing the threat of Chinese annexation.

“Although the CCP leadership sees the 4 June incident as something shameful, what they learned from it is the need for strict control – eliminating any sign of unrest early on, controlling and blocking public opinion, and brainwashing to people. They work to crush all **instability** at the earliest stage,” he said according to CNA’s translation.

#### [2025-06-04 Putin tells Trump Russia ‘will have to respond’ to Ukraine drone attack](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/jun/04/trump-putin-conversation-ukraine-drone-attack)

Donald Trump spoke with Vladimir Putin for more than an hour on Wednesday, but he conceded the talks would not lead “to immediate peace” in Ukraine, and warned that Russia would respond to Ukraine’s successful attacks this week on its airfields.

The US president, who repeatedly claimed he could end the Ukraine war in 24 hours during his election campaign, did not attempt to **discourage** the Russian leader from retaliation, according to his description of the discussion on his Truth Social platform.

He noted instead that Putin had **offered to** participate in US talks with Iran about its nuclear programme, which Trump claimed Tehran had been “slowwalking”. The programme has expanded considerably since 2018, when Trump withdrew from a multilateral agreement to **constrain** it in exchange for sanctions relief.

In separate remarks on Wednesday, Putin once again ruled out a comprehensive ceasefire in Ukraine, claiming it would just give Kyiv time to regroup and rearm, while Ukraine’s Volodymyr Zelenskyy described Moscow’s peace proposals presented earlier this week as nothing more than an “ultimatum”.

The comments from both leaders confirmed negotiations in Istanbul on Monday had made no **headway** towards a truce, but the two sides signalled progress on other issues, including the transfer of captives and bodies.

Russia said it was “working” on the return of more than 300 Ukrainian children who the Kyiv government and the international criminal court (ICC) say were abducted by invading forces.

It also confirmed there would be a prisoner exchange in the coming days, and there were continuing discussions on plans to repatriate thousands of bodies of fallen soldiers from both sides.

Zelenskyy said he expected 500 **PoWs** to be swapped this weekend, but he said that the broader peace proposal put forward by Russia in Istanbul **amounted to** “an ultimatum from the Russian side to us”.

Immediately after Monday’s meeting, Ukrainian officials said they needed more time to study the document handed over by the Russians, but press reports at the time said that it simply restated Russia’s maximalist demand that Ukrainian forces withdraw from four regions under partial Russian occupation.

Putin stated his position on Wednesday in the form of a televised virtual meeting with his aides.

After being informed that Ukraine had proposed an unconditional ceasefire of 30 to 60 days, Putin asked: “Why reward them by giving them a break from the combat, which will be used to **pump** the regime with western arms, to continue their forced mobilisation and to prepare different terrorist acts?”

He pointed to recent Ukrainian attacks on bridges inside Russia, one of which helped cause a train crash that killed seven people.

On Sunday, Ukraine also carried out a remote-controlled mass drone attack on four Russian airfields, which Kyiv claims **knocked out** more than a third of Moscow’s heavy bombers capable of firing cruise missiles.

Ukrainian officials said 41 Russian warplanes, including strategic bombers and other types of combat aircraft, were destroyed or damaged in Sunday’s operation, which they claimed had taken 18 months to plan. On Wednesday, they released additional drone footage of the attack, codenamed Operation Spiderweb.

Satellite photos analysed and published by the Associated Press showed aircraft wreckage and **scorched** areas at Belaya base, one of the four airfields targeted.

It said the images showed at least three Tu-95 and four Tu-22M bombers – both capable of firing cruise missiles – had been destroyed on the runway. Other aircraft at the base appeared **unscathed**.

In his Truth Social post, Trump said the drone attacks on Russian airfields had come up in his hour-and-15-minute conversation with Putin on Wednesday.

“We discussed the attack on Russia’s **docked** airplanes, by Ukraine, and also various other attacks that have been taking place by both sides,” Trump said.

“It was a good conversation, but not a conversation that will lead to immediate Peace. President Putin did say, and very strongly, that he will have to respond to the recent attack on the airfields.”

Trump told Putin that Ukraine did not inform him before the drone attacks, a Kremlin spokesperson said.

Putin also spoke on Wednesday to Pope Leo XIV, in the US-born pontiff’s first call to the Russian leader since he became head of the world’s Catholics last month.

The Vatican said in a statement that during the call, “the pope made an appeal for Russia to make a gesture that favours peace”.

Before the Istanbul talks, Russia stepped up its aerial attacks on cities, and pushed further into Ukraine’s northern region of Sumy, seizing more than 150 sq km (58 sq miles) of the area in less than two weeks, according to Russian claims and Ukrainian open-source mapping.

During his election campaign, Trump claimed more than 50 times he could end the Ukraine conflict within a day, but his comments on Wednesday did not involve any calls for **restraint**.

While Putin has ruled out a comprehensive ceasefire, Russia has suggested two- to three-day local truces on different parts of the frontline, to allow the opposing armies to collect their dead, a proposal Moscow says Kyiv has rejected.

However, both sides showed on Wednesday they were ready to continue with the exchange of PoWs, the bodies of dead soldiers, and to offer some cooperation on Kyiv’s priority, the return of Ukrainian children.

In the televised government meeting on Wednesday, the chief Russian negotiator in Istanbul, Vladimir Medinsky, said Russia was “working” on the return of Ukrainian children, noting that Kyiv had presented a list of 339 of them.

Russia has claimed Ukrainian children were taken to Russia for their safety, while Kyiv insisted they had been abducted. The Ukrainian view was **underpinned** by the ICC, which issued arrest warrants in March 2023 for Putin and his “**commissioner** for children’s rights”, Maria Lvova-Belova, for their role in the “unlawful **deportation**” of the Ukrainian children.

After the Istanbul meeting, Zelenskyy said the Ukrainian delegation had handed the Russians a list of nearly 400 names of abducted Ukrainian children, but claimed that Russia had only offered to resolve the cases of 10 of them.

After Monday’s talks, Turkey’s leader, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, announced he wanted to host a Putin-Zelenskyy summit also involving Trump. Zelenskyy has been challenging his Russian counterpart to meet him face to face for some months.

“We are ready for such a meeting any day,” the Ukrainian leader said on Wednesday, adding it was “pointless” to hold further talks with the midlevel Russian delegates Putin has sent to the talks – who Zelenskyy has previously dismissed as “empty heads” – since they were not **empowered** to agree a ceasefire.

Putin maintained his opposition to a personal meeting with Zelenskyy, however, on the grounds of the recent attacks on railways in the Kursk and Bryansk border regions, which he described as “terrorist acts”.

“How can any such summit meetings be conducted in such circumstances? What shall we talk about?” Putin asked in his video call with his officials.

Since Trump’s return to the White House in January, European capitals have sought to take more of a leading role in bolstering Ukraine’s defence, and on Wednesday, a series of military industrial support measures were announced at a meeting of the 52-country strong Ukraine Defense Contact Group at Nato headquarters in Brussels, **chaired** jointly by the UK and Germany.

#### [2025-06-05 Japan records lowest number of births in more than a century, as population fears grow](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/05/japan-records-lowest-number-of-births-in-more-than-a-century-as-population-fears-grow)

Japan’s struggle to encourage couples to have more children has been given greater urgency after data showed the annual number of births dropped to below 700,000 for the first time since records began more than a century ago.

According to government data released this week, the number of births reached 686,061 in 2024, a decline of 5.7% from the previous year and the lowest since statistics were first kept in 1899. The data excludes babies born to foreign residents.

The fertility rate – the average number of children a woman has in her lifetime – also fell to a record-low of 1.15, down from 1.20 in 2023, the health ministry said. That is well below the rate of 2.1 needed to keep the population stable. The ministry said 1.6m deaths had been recorded in 2024, up 1.9% from a year earlier.

The number of births and the fertility rate have fallen for nine years **in a row**, although the number of marriages was slightly up last year, two years after it dipped below half a million for the first time.

The number of marriages – a key factor in influencing birth trends in a country where relatively few children are born out of **wedlock** – rose for the first time in two years to 485,063, up by 10,322 from a year earlier. But the downward trend seen since the 1970s remains unchanged.

Japan’s birthrate has been falling since it reached the second baby boom in 1973, falling below 1 million in 2016 and below 800,000 in 2022. Last year’s figure is about one-quarter of the all-time peak of 2.7 million births in 1949.

The latest figures will make uncomfortable reading for officials, as the number of births has fallen into the 680,000 range 15 years earlier than forecast by the National Institute of Population and Social Security Research, according to the Kyodo news agency.

If current trends persists, Japan’s population of about 124 million is **projected** to fall to 87 million by 2070, when 40% of the population will be 65 or over.

A shrinking and ageing population could have serious **implications** for the economy and national security, as the country seeks to boost its military to counter potential threats from China and North Korea.

The prime minister, Shigeru Ishiba, who has described Japan’s demographics as a “silent emergency”, recently unveiled measures to boost the birthrate, including an expansion of child **allowance** and free high school education, and a guarantee that couples will receive the equivalent of 100% of their take-home pay when they take **parental leave** at the same time.

Ishiba’s predecessor, Fumio Kishida, warned that the falling birthrate, combined with rising numbers of deaths, threatened Japan’s ability “to function as a society”, adding the country had reached a “**now or never**” moment to address its demographic crisis.

But attempts by **successive** governments to ease the financial pressure on couples have had little effect, with statistics showing that people continue to marry later in life, a trend that results in smaller families.

The government has been criticised for focusing on married couples rather than on younger, single people who have been **put off** the idea of marriage. Many cite poor employment prospects and job security, the rising cost of living, and a **corporate culture** that makes it difficult for female employees to become working mothers.

A 2023 survey by the Nippon Foundation found that only 16.5% of people aged 17 to 19 believed they would get married, even though a much larger proportion wanted to do so.

#### [2025-06-05 Impeachment, Epstein and bitter acrimony: Trump and Musk joust in astonishing social media duel](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/jun/05/trump-elon-musk-fallout)

Elon Musk called for Donald Trump’s impeachment and **mocked** his connections to the **convicted** sex **offender** Jeffrey Epstein, as the US president threatened to cancel federal contracts and tax subsidies for Musk’s companies, in an extraordinary social media feud that erupted between the former allies on Thursday.

The **deterioration** of their once close relationship into bitter **acrimony** came over the course of several remarkable hours during which the president and the world’s richest person **hurled** deeply personal **insults** over matters significant and **insignificant**.

The direct shots at Trump were the latest **twist** in the public **showdown** over a Republican spending bill that Musk had criticized. Trump and Musk had been careful not to hit each other directly, but on Thursday the pair discarded restraint as the feud escalated on their respective social media platforms.

In the most **churlish** moment of the astonishing **saga**, Musk said on X the reason the Trump administration had not released the files into Epstein was because they **implicated** the president. He later quote-tweeted a post calling for Trump to be removed and said Trump’s tariffs would cause a recession.

“Time to drop the really big bomb: Donald Trump is in the Epstein files. That is the real reason they have not been made public. Have a nice day, DJT!” Musk wrote, after Trump threatened to cut subsidies for Musk’s companies as it would save “billions”.

It was a **bizarre** drama that served to underscore the degree to which Trump and Musk’s relationship has been one of mutual **convenience**, despite the White House claiming for months that they were simply ideologically aligned.

It also caused the rightwing writer Ashley St Clair, who gave birth to Musk’s 14th known child and sued Musk for child support, to **weigh in**. “Let me know if u need any breakup advice,” she posted on X, tagging Trump.

Shares in Tesla, Musk’s electronic vehicle company, fell almost 15% on Thursday afternoon with the decline timed to when Trump’s remarks began. Musk’s rocket company, SpaceX, is not publicly traded, but competitors to SpaceX rose on the news.

For weeks, Musk has complained about the budget bill, and used the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office estimating the bill would add $2.4tn to the deficit over the next decade as an opening to condemn the legislation as a “disgusting **abomination**”.

On Thursday, Trump appeared to finally have had enough of Musk’s complaints. Speaking in the Oval Office as the German chancellor, Friedrich Merz, looked on in **bemusement**, Trump mocked Musk’s recent black eye and questioned why he didn’t cover it up.

“You saw a man who was very happy when he stood behind the Oval desk. Even with a black eye. I said, do you want a little makeup? He said, no, I don’t think so. Which is interesting,” Trump said. “Elon and I had a great relationship. I don’t know if we will any more.”

Trump then ratcheted up his barbs against Musk, accusing him of turning against the bill solely out of self-interest, as the bill did not benefit Tesla, Musk’s electronic vehicle company. Trump also pulled the **nomination** of Musk’s preferred candidate to lead Nasa.

“I’m very disappointed with Elon,” Trump said. “He had no problem with it. All of a sudden he had a problem, and he only developed the problem when he found out we’re going to cut the EV **mandate**.”

Musk then went on the **warpath**.

Within minutes of Trump’s comments appearing in a clip on X, where Musk was responding in real time, Musk accused the president of lying about the bill, and accused Trump of being ungrateful for the millions he spent to get him elected.

“Without me, Trump would have lost the election, Dems would control the House and the Republicans would be 51-49 in the Senate,” Musk said in a post on X. He added: “Such **ingratitude**.”

Musk taking credit for Trump’s election win initially threatened to be the **touchpoint** for their relationship, given Trump had made a point to say that Musk’s contributions had no effect on him winning the battleground state of Pennsylvania.

But then Trump posted on Truth Social that he had fired Musk from his role as a special adviser because he was “**wearing thin**” at the White House, and Musk responded: “Such an obvious lie. So sad.”

It was less than a half an hour later that Musk fired off his Epstein tweet, in effect accusing him of being part of an alleged child sexual abuse ring linked to Epstein, using a dog whistle for the Maga movement to try to set them against the president.

In doing so, Musk ignored his own connections to Epstein. In 2014, like Trump, Musk was photographed at a party with Ghislaine Maxwell, a former Epstein girlfriend who was convicted in 2021 on charges that she helped the **financier**’s **sex-trafficking** activities.

The public feud comes after a remarkable partnership that lasted longer than many Democrats on Capitol Hill and in Trump’s **orbit** predicted.

Musk spent hundreds of millions of dollars on Trump’s re-election campaign through his specially created America Pac, which **shouldered** a large portion of Trump’s door-knocking campaign, although the actual impact of that **ground-game** effort is unclear.

#### [2025-06-05 Donald Trump to meet Xi Jinping in China after ‘very good’ call on trade](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/jun/05/donald-trump-xi-jinping-china-phone-call-invitation-trade-tariffs)

Donald Trump said he had accepted an invitation to meet Xi Jinping in China after a phone conversation on trade was held between the leaders of the world’s two largest economies.

In a post on Truth Social, the US president said the “very good” call lasted about 90 minutes and the conversation was “almost entirely focused on trade”.

He wrote: “The call lasted approximately one and a half hours, and resulted in a very positive conclusion for both Countries. There should no longer be any questions **respecting** the complexity of Rare Earth products. Our respective teams will be meeting shortly at a location to be determined … During the conversation, President Xi **graciously** invited the First Lady and me to visit China, and I **reciprocated**.”

Trump added that teams from the US and China would meet soon at a location to be determined.

The Chinese foreign ministry said Trump initiated the call, which was only the second time this year the two leaders had spoken one to one. They previously spoke in January, before Trump’s inauguration.

The discussion followed posts on social media by Trump that praised the Chinese leader but also suggested it was difficult to reach a deal with him.

Trade negotiations between the US and China stalled shortly after an agreement between the countries on 12 May to reduce 145% import tariffs on China imposed by Washington, and Beijing’s 125% tariffs on US imports in a tit-for-tat exchange.

The agreement allowed for a reduction in tariffs during a 90-day **moratorium** before talks to resolve differences, especially over the export of Chinese rare earth **metals**, which are crucial to making electric cars and mobile phones.

The US treasury secretary, Scott Bessent, the commerce secretary, Howard Lutnick, and the US trade representative, Jamieson Greer, will represent the US side in negotiations.

Trump is under pressure to resolve the dispute with China after a series of weak economic figures that showed a sharp slowdown in US growth and a reluctance among private companies to hire staff. Large US businesses have also complained about the high cost of purchasing vital goods made in China.

The Chinese government said in a statement published by the state-run Xinhua news agency: “Xi Jinping welcomed Trump’s visit to China again, and Trump expressed his sincere gratitude.”

However, it added: “The US side should take a realistic view of the progress made and withdraw the negative measures imposed on China.”

China’s decision in April to suspend exports of a wide range of critical minerals and **magnets** has disrupted supplies needed by carmakers, computer chip manufacturers and military contractors around the world.

Trump has long pushed for a call or a meeting with Xi, but China has rejected the proposal as out of keeping with its traditional approach based on hammering out agreement details before the leaders talk.

#### [2025-06-06 Frequent TikTok users in Taiwan more likely to agree with pro-China narratives, study finds](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/06/frequent-tiktok-users-in-taiwan-more-likely-to-agree-with-pro-china-narratives-study-finds)

Taiwanese people who spend large amounts of time on TikTok are more likely to agree with some pro-China narratives, a survey has suggested.

The study, conducted by the Taiwan-based DoubleThink Lab, surveyed people across Taiwan in March, asking a series of questions about politics and democracy in Taiwan and China, and their views on unification of the two sides.

It found that among the respondents, agreement with criticisms of Taiwan’s domestic issues, and with the prospect of unifying with China, rose as TikTok use increased, before dropping again among the heaviest users of more than 14 hours a week.

China’s ruling Communist party (CCP) claims Taiwan is a province of China and has vowed to annex it under what it terms “reunification”, by force if necessary. Social media is a key **battleground** in China’s information warfare, as it seeks to convince or coerce Taiwan into accepting annexation without military conflict.

The DoubleThink Lab report claimed the more active TikTok users showed stronger **correlations** with an openness to Chinese propaganda and the idea that unification with China is inevitable and democracy should be sacrificed for peace.

There was also correlation with unhappiness about current domestic issues, including opposition-driven accusations of **judicial** unfairness and **erosions** of free speech. Differences were stark among supporters of Taiwan’s ruling Democratic Progressive party (DPP), which the CCP has labelled illegal separatists.

“Our analysis suggests that active TikTok use is more likely to influence users’ political attitudes toward being more anti-democratic **establishment** and positive attitudes toward PRC governance, even among groups traditionally opposed to the CCP,” said the report’s author, Eric Hsu.

The percentage of DPP supporters who used TikTok and thought it was acceptable to give up Taiwan’s democratic system “for the sake of cross-strait peace” was 10 points higher than non-users, at 26.8%, the report said. And in response to statements that the DPP was “no different from the CCP and Taiwan lacks freedom of speech”, 23.9% of DPP supporters who used TikTok agreed, compared with 9.3% who were not active on the app.

TikTok is owned by the Chinese company ByteDance, and fears of it being used to spread pro-CCP propaganda have already resulted in restrictions or threats of **outright** bans in several countries, including the US. In Taiwan, there are rules against TikTok being used on government devices.

In 2019, the Guardian revealed how ByteDance used TikTok to **advance** Beijing’s foreign policy aims by moderating sensitive content. A 2023 study, by Rutgers University’s Network Contagion Research Institute in the US, found TikTok’s algorithms consistently amplify pro-CCP content and suppress anti-CCP narratives, with much of the pro-CCP content originating from state-linked entities.

ByteDance has long denied the allegations.

“From the CCP’s founding, there has always been a strong emphasis on both the ‘pen’ and the ‘gun’ – meaning propaganda and force,” said Yu-hui Tai, an assistant professor at Taiwan’s National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University.

Tai said Taiwan was on the frontline of China’s propaganda efforts, and its digital environment was “complex”. She added: “TikTok is not the only app young people use”, noting that Douyin – the Chinese domestic version of TikTok, which some Taiwanese also use – is very different in content and **moderation** to TikTok.

The Guardian has reported previously on the popularity of other Chinese apps that have increased their cultural influence among young Taiwanese.

Titus C Chen, a research fellow at Taiwan’s National Chengchi University, said the vast majority of TikTok users “aren’t actively seeking out political content when they use the platform”.

He said it could not be ruled out that users were just more **inclined** to agree with such views and so were being fed content that aligned with their interests.

“That said, it’s undeniably true that TikTok’s content – both its Chinese and international versions – is heavily influenced and controlled by the Chinese government,” said Chen. “So it’s very unlikely you’ll come across much content on TikTok that supports liberal democracy.”

#### [2025-06-08 Newsom is warned of ‘criminal tax evasion’ if he withholds federal taxes](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/jun/08/newsom-warned-tax-evasion)

The US treasury secretary, Scott Bessent, has warned California governor Gavin Newsom that he would be guilty of “criminal tax **evasion**” if he **withholds** his state’s tax payments to the federal government amid threats of a funding cut by Donald Trump.

Newsom had threatened to cut tax payments to the federal government two days ago after reports that Trump was preparing huge federal funding cuts targeting Democrat-dominated California, including its state university system.

“Gavin Newsom is threatening to commit criminal tax evasion,” Bessent said in a post on X. “His plan: **defraud** the American taxpayer and leave California residents on the hook for unpaid federal taxes.”

Bessent continued: “I am certain most California businesses know that failing to pay taxes owed to the Treasury constitutes tax evasion and have no intention of following the dangerous path Governor Gavin Newsom is threatening.”

He described Newsom’s comments as “extremely **reckless**” and advised the governor to come up with a tax-cutting plan for California that mirrored Trump’s federal tax cutting plan, “instead of committing criminal tax evasion”.

The treasury secretary’s comments came after Newsom posted on Friday that “Californians pay the bills for the federal government. We pay over $80 BILLION more in taxes than we get back. Maybe it’s time to cut that off, Donald Trump.”

The California governor linked to a CNN report that the Trump administration is preparing to cancel some federal funding for California and federal agencies had been directed to identify grants that could be withheld, including the University of California and California state university systems.

In a statement on Friday, the White House spokesperson Kush Desai criticized California’s energy, immigration and other positions as “lunatic anti-energy, soft-on-crime, pro-child **mutilation**, and pro-**sanctuary** policies”.

“No taxpayer should be forced to **fund** the **demise** of our country,” Desai said, but he added that “No final decisions, however, on any potential future action by the Administration have been made, and any discussion suggesting otherwise should be considered **pure speculation**.”

Newsom and Trump are accustomed to a war of words, including threats to withhold funding. The administration recently cut $126m in flood prevention funding projects, and Trump has threatened “large-scale **fines**” on the state after **transgender** athlete AB Hernandez competed in the long jump, high jump and triple jump events at the California Interscholastic Federation **track and field championships**.

But the reported threat to cut off federal funding to California’s university system appears to have pushed California officials into threats of retaliation. Soon before Newsom made his threat, California **assembly speaker** Robert Rivas described the **rumored** grant cancellations as “unconstitutional and **vindictive**.”

“We’re the nation’s economic engine and the largest **donor** state, and deserve our fair share,” Rivas wrote. “I’ll use every legal and constitutional tool available to defend CA – we must look at every option, including withholding federal taxes.”

#### [2025-06-09 Chinese aircraft carrier group enters waters near Japan’s easternmost island for first time](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/09/chinese-aircraft-carrier-japan-exclusive-economic-zone-waters)

A Chinese aircraft carrier group has entered an area of Japan’s territorial waters for the first time, prompting concern in Tokyo over China’s expanding naval reach.

The Liaoning carrier, accompanied by two missile destroyers and a supply ship, entered Japan’s exclusive economic zone (EEZ) on Saturday evening, Japan’s defence ministry said, before exiting to conduct military drills.

The chief cabinet secretary, Yoshimasa Hayashi, did not say if the government had **lodged** a formal protest, saying only that it had “conveyed an appropriate message to the Chinese side”.

“We will do our utmost to perform our warning and surveillance duties at sea and in the air,” he added, according to the Kyodo news agency.

The incursion into Pacific waters about 300km south-west of Minamitori island will add to concern in Tokyo and Washington about China’s increasingly **assertive** naval and air activity in and around Japanese waters.

The countries are **embroiled** in a longstanding territorial dispute over the Senkakus – uninhabited islets in the east China Sea that are administered by Japan but claimed by China, where they are known as the Diaoyu.

This is the first time, however, that a Chinese vessel has entered that part of Japan’s EEZ – an area within 200 **nautical** miles (370km) of its coastline – a defence ministry spokesperson told Agence France-Presse.

“We think the Chinese military is trying to improve its operational capability and ability to conduct operations in distant areas,” the spokesperson said.

After leaving the EEZ, the Chinese carrier group conducted **landing and take-off** drills involving fighter jets and helicopters, the ministry said, adding that Japan had deployed a warship, Haguro, to monitor the situation.

Minamitori, the **easternmost** point of the Japanese **archipelago**, is surrounded by large **deposits** of rare metals. Last year, experts from the Nippon Foundation and Tokyo University said about 200m tonnes of **manganese** **nodules** rich in rare metals existed on the seabed near the island.

No civilians live on Minamitori, located about 1,900km south-east of Tokyo, but it hosts a small number of personnel from the meteorological agency, the self-defence forces and the coast guard.

Saturday’s incident was the latest in a series of incursions by Chinese vessels into Japanese waters. Last month, the Liaoning sailed between two southern islands inside a different region of Japan’s EEZ. In September last year the same carrier group sailed between Yonaguni and Iriomote – two Japanese islands near Taiwan – and entered Japan’s contiguous waters, an area up to 24 nautical miles from its coast.

Japan’s government condemned the move at the time as “unacceptable” and voiced “serious concerns” to Beijing.

#### [2025-06-09 Chinese tech firms freeze AI tools in crackdown on exam cheats](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/09/chinese-tech-firms-freeze-ai-tools-exam-cheats-universities-gaokao)

Big Chinese tech companies appear to have turned off some AI functions to prevent cheating during the country’s highly competitive university entrance exams.

More than 13.3 million students are sitting the four-day gaokao exams, which began on Saturday and determine if and where students can secure a limited place at university.

This year, students hoping to get some assistance from increasingly advanced AI tools have been **stymied**.

In screenshots shared online, one Chinese user posted a photo of an exam question to Doubao, owned by TikTok’s parent company, ByteDance. The app responded: “During the college entrance examination, according to relevant requirements, the question answering service will be suspended”.

An attempt by the user to tell the app “this is not the college entrance examination” prompted the same response.

Another screenshot also revealed DeepSeek, a leading generative AI tool new to the Chinese market this year, was telling users that their service was not available during specific hours “to ensure fairness in the college entrance examination”.

Yuanbao, owned by the tech company Tencent, Alibaba’s Qwen, and Moonshot’s Kimi have also turned off their picture recognition functions during exam hours, Bloomberg reports.

The Guardian has contacted the relevant companies for comment, none of which have made public statements about the functions freeze. The suspension appears to have been publicised largely by university students who have been locked out of tools to assist them in their study and **assignments**.

“College entrance exam candidates, you are all shit,” read one tongue-in-cheek complaint on Weibo. “I can’t use DeepSeek to upload pictures, I have to download ChatGPT again, I hope you all go to community college.”

The AI suspension is not the only tool being used to prevent cheating in the gaokao exam week, which can decide a young person’s entire future. Several regions have previously announced they would be using AI monitoring tools to watch for “abnormal behaviours”, such as whispers or repeated glances between students, during exams.

In Jiangxi province, for example, footage will be reviewed after the exam and any violations or **misconduct** “**dealt** with strictly in accordance with relevant regulations”, the state-backed Global Times reports.

Late last month, Chinese authorities also announced stricter entry checks at exam points, **biometric** identification, enhanced screening for digital devices, and radio signal blockers, state media reported.

Reflecting how seriously Chinese society views the gaokao, some cities have postponed **disruptive** events such as public performances, delayed office starting hours and created **dedicated** priority traffic **lanes** to ensure students arrive to the test on time.

#### [2025-06-10 Zelenskyy calls for ‘concrete actions’ as Russian strikes hit seven of Kyiv’s 10 districts](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/10/zelenskyy-russian-strikes-kyiv-ukraine-moscow)

Volodymyr Zelenskyy has voiced his **frustration** with Donald Trump by calling for “concrete actions” rather than “silence” after Russia launched one of its largest attacks on Kyiv of the war, with seven of the Ukrainian capital’s 10 districts hit overnight.

A total of 316 drones and seven missiles were launched at Ukrainian targets across the country in the early hours of Tuesday, including at Odesa in the south-east, where two people were killed. But it was the capital that was the focus of Russia’s ferocious barrage.

The **unrelenting** night-time raid stretched over five hours and will be seen as part of a continuing response by the Kremlin to Ukraine’s Operation Spiderweb, which struck Russia’s nuclear-capable bombers on Monday last week.

The strikes on Tuesday morning followed a record 419 drones launched at Ukraine the previous night.

Ukraine’s air defence systems shot down seven Russian missiles and 213 attack drones, while 64 drones were said to have disappeared from radars or were intercepted by electronic warfare systems.

In a statement on his Telegram channel, Zelenskyy appeared to criticise the lack of response from the US and others to the recent stepping up of Russia’s attacks. Trump has **prevaricated** over the question of further economic sanctions on the Kremlin.

Zelenskyy said: “Russian strikes with missiles and Shaheds drones are louder than the efforts of the United States and others in the world to force Russia to peace. Every night, instead of a ceasefire, there have been massive strikes with Shaheds, cruise missiles and ballistics. Today was one of the largest strikes on Kyiv. Odesa, the Dnipro region and Chernihiv region were also targeted.”

Zelenskyy said 250 of the drones were Shaheds, and two of the seven missiles were of “North Korean production”.

He added: “Ordinary houses and urban infrastructure were damaged, and even a **maternity** hospital in Odesa became a Russian target. Thirteen people were injured. Unfortunately, there are **fatalities**. My condolences to the relatives.

“It is important that the response to this and other similar Russian strikes is not the silence of the world but concrete actions. Actions by America, which has the power to force Russia to peace. The actions of Europe, which has no alternative but to be strong. The actions of others in the world who have called for diplomacy and an end to the war and who have been ignored by Russia. Hard pressure is needed for peace.”

The **buzzing** of drones followed by explosions could be heard throughout the night in Kyiv, where residents had been told by the local authorities to take shelter in **bunkers**.

The city smelled of smoke on Tuesday with charred residential buildings and the remains of cars on the streets offering evidence of the impact of the strikes, which are believed to have targeted the city’s energy infrastructure.

Due to the poor air quality caused by the smoke billowing from the locations of the strikes, residents were advised on Tuesday morning to keep their windows closed and to avoid unnecessary outdoor activity.

Timur Tkachenko, the head of Kyiv’s military district, said on Telegram: “A difficult night for all of us. Throughout the night, the enemy relentlessly **terrorised** Kyiv with attack drones. They targeted civilian infrastructure and peaceful residents of the city.”

Ukraine’s foreign minister, Andrii Sybiha, called for tougher sanctions on Russia and for air defences to strengthen Ukraine after the attack.

He said: “Russia rejects any meaningful peace efforts and must face new, devastating sanctions. Already now. There is no more time to wait.”

In Odesa, 10 drone strikes injured nine people as well as killing two, including a 59-year-old man, while a maternity hospital was among the buildings damaged.

The Odesa regional governor, Oleh Kiper, said: “The Russians hit a maternity hospital, an emergency medical ward and residential buildings.”

Zelenskyy’s chief of staff, Andriy Yermak, claimed Russia had targeted civilian infrastructure. “Russian attacks on civilian targets continue,” he wrote. “Russia lies every day about wanting peace and every day it targets civilians.”

#### [2025-06-10 Protests across US as anger grows over Trump’s immigration crackdown](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/jun/10/us-protests-immigration-trump)

Protests against the Trump administration’s newly intensified immigration raids, centered on Los Angeles, spread across the country on Tuesday, with demonstrations in New York, Chicago, Atlanta, Omaha and Seattle.

Thousands attended a protest against the federal government’s Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice) in New York City’s Foley Square.

Some protesters held signs reading “Ice out of New York” and others chanted “Why are you in riot **gear**? I don’t see no riot here.”

Shirley, a 29-year-old protester, condemned the Trump administration for targeting workers, which she called **antithetical** to the country’s **essence**.

“I come from immigrant parents,” she said, with a large Mexican flag **draped** across her back. “It’s **infuriating** to see that this particular government is going into labor fields, taking people from construction sites, into industry, plants, into farms, and taking away what is the backbone of this country.

“So I’m here today to remind everybody that the United States started as an immigrant country, and it’s a nation of immigrants, and I just want to make sure that I’m here for those who can’t be here today.”

Councilmember Shahana Hanif of Brooklyn spoke before the large crowd in Foley Square. She criticized the Trump administration and New York’s mayor, Eric Adams, for the crackdown on immigrants.

“Mayor Adams has made it clear that he doesn’t care about working class people,” she said. “He does not care about any one of us. He is collaborating with Trump to use tactics. He’s **complicit**.”

She also expressed her desire to keep New York a sanctuary city, and called for more protections for international students.

“Stop the attacks and **assaults** on our students!” she yelled, and was met with cheers from the crowd.

Thousands also gathered outside an immigration court in Chicago, and then marched through downtown streets, **drumming** and chanting, “No more deportations!”

At one point, a car drove through the marchers, narrowly missing the anti-Ice protesters, according to WGN TV News, which broadcast video of the incident.

In **metro** Atlanta, hundreds of people marched along Buford Highway in **solidarity** with Los Angeles, local 11 Alive News reported.

Protesters marched in Omaha on Tuesday, chanting “Chinga la migra” (a Spanish phrase that roughly translates to the **slogan** “Fuck Ice” on placards waved by the marchers) after about 80 people were reportedly arrested in an immigration raid on a **meat-packing** plant.

In Seattle, a small crowd of about 50 protesters gathered outside the Henry M Jackson federal building in downtown Seattle to show solidarity with protesters in Los Angeles, the Seattle Times reported.

After a rally, the protesters **barricaded** driveways with e-bikes and e-**scooters** to block homeland **security** vehicles thought to be transporting detained immigrants.

Large rallies also took place in Dallas and Austin on Monday, and up to 1,800 protests are planned nationwide on Saturday, to coincide with the military parade Donald Trump is throwing on his birthday in the nation’s capital.

#### [2025-06-11 US and China agree framework deal to extend trade war truce](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/11/us-china-trade-talks-framework-deal-amid-dispute-over-rare-earths)

Officials from the US and China have agreed on a “framework” to move forward on trade after two days of talks in London **stemming** from their confrontation over tariffs.

The US commerce secretary, Howard Lutnick, expressed optimism on Tuesday that concerns about **critical** or “rare earth” minerals and magnets “will be resolved” as the deal is implemented.

Lutnick told reporters that the framework puts “meat on the bones” of a deal reached last month in Geneva to ease retaliatory tariffs. Its implementation had **faltered** over China’s curbs on critical mineral exports. The deal also would remove some US export restrictions that were recently put in place, Lutnick said.

“We have reached a framework to implement the Geneva consensus and the call between the two presidents,” Lutnick said. “The idea is we’re going to go back and speak to President Trump and make sure he approves it. They’re going to go back and speak to President Xi and make sure he approves it, and if that is approved, we will then implement the framework.”

In a separate briefing, China’s vice commerce minister Li Chenggang said a trade framework had been reached that would be taken back to US and Chinese leaders.

“The two sides have, in principle, reached a framework for implementing the consensus reached by the two heads of state during the phone call on June 5th and the consensus reached at the Geneva meeting,” Li told reporters.

Lutnick said China’s restrictions on exports of critical minerals and magnets to the US would be resolved as a “fundamental” part of the framework agreement. “Also, there were a number of measures the United States of America put on when those rare earths were not coming,” Lutnick said. “You should expect those to **come off**, sort of as President Trump said, in a balanced way.”

Li said: “Our communication has been very professional, rational, in-depth and candid.”

All eyes were on the outcomes of negotiations as both sides were at an **impasse** over export restrictions, with US officials earlier accusing Beijing of slow-walking approvals for shipments of critical minerals.

The world’s two biggest economies were also seeking a longer-lasting truce in their escalating tariffs war, with levies reduced temporarily.

“We’re moving as quickly as we can,” US trade representative Jamieson Greer told reporters. “We feel positive about engaging with the Chinese.”

#### [2025-06-11 Four former staff of Taiwan’s ruling party charged with spying for China](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/11/four-former-officials-in-taiwans-ruling-party-charged-with-spying-for-china-ntwnfb)

Taiwan prosecutors have charged four former staffers in the ruling Democratic Progressive party with spying for China while they worked in senior positions.

The four include a former aide to Lai Ching-te when he was vice-president and for a time during his current presidency, and a senior staffer to Joseph Wu, then foreign minister and now the national security chief.

They had been accused of sharing state secrets with China over a **prolonged** period of time, including “important and sensitive diplomatic information” that significantly harmed national security, prosecutors alleged in a statement. One of the accused, who worked for a Taipei city **councillor**, is accused of transmitting information to China “via a specific messaging app”. Other alleged **offences** include money laundering.

Prosecutors are seeking prison sentences ranging from five to more than 18 years, and the **confiscation** of more than NT$8.3m (£205,000/US$277,000) in illicit gains.

Two **defendants** confessed but two others, including the former Wu staffer, had denied the allegations against them, prosecutors said.

Separately, local media reported several staffers in the opposition Kuomintang party were under investigation for similar offences.

Taiwan has ramped up its efforts to **root out** Taiwanese spies working for the Chinese government. In 2024, authorities prosecuted 64 people on such charges, more than in the previous two years combined. Many of those prosecuted were retired or serving members of the armed forces.

In March, four soldiers, including three who worked in the security team for the president’s office, were sentenced to up to seven years in jail for espionage.

In this week’s case, prosecutors allege the four received payments of between NT$260,000 and NT$660,000 for taking photographs of information with their mobile phones.

China’s government claims Taiwan is a province of China and accuses its democratically elected government of being illegal separatists. It has vowed to annex Taiwan under what it calls “reunification” and has not ruled out using military force. Beijing operates multiple and intensive pressure campaigns of military “greyzone” harassment, cyberwarfare, disinformation, and espionage.

Taiwan and China have spied on each other for decades, but analysts say Taiwan is under greater threat **given** Beijing’s annexation intentions. Chinese authorities in May announced small **bounties** for information leading to the capture of 20 Taiwanese nationals they accused of hacking into a Guangzhou tech company, an accusation Taiwan dismissed as false.

#### [2025-06-11 Hong Kong police tell people not to download ‘secessionist’ mobile game](https://www.theguardian.com/games/2025/jun/11/hong-kong-police-taiwan-mobile-games-reversed-front)

Hong Kong police have warned people against downloading a Taiwan-developed mobile game which they say is “**secessionist**” and could lead to arrest.

The game, Reversed Front: Bonfire, allows users to “pledge **allegiance**” to various groups linked to locations that have been major flashpoints or targets for China including Taiwan, Hong Kong, Tibet, Uyghurs, Kazakhs and Manchuria, in order to “overthrow the communist regime” known as the “People’s Republic”.

While some aspects and place names of the game’s worldview are imagined, the website says the game is “a work of NON-**FICTION**” and “any similarity to actual agencies, policies, or ethnic groups of the PRC China in this game is **INTENTIONAL**”.

Players may also choose to “lead the communists to defeat all enemies” in the game, but it has provoked a reaction from authorities aligned with the Chinese Communist party (CCP).

On Tuesday Hong Kong police said Reversed Front was “advocating armed revolution” and promoting Taiwanese and Hong Kong independence “under the guise of a game”.

Downloading the game could lead to players being charged with possessing **seditious** material, while making in-app purchases could be viewed as providing funding to the developers “for the commission of secession or subversion”, the police said.

Recommending the game could also **constitute** the offence of “incitement to secession”.

In Reversed Front’s worldview, communists have conquered surrounding lands and formed a mega state, ruling it as a “colonial power with unprecedented **cruelty**”, and forcing many of the conquered peoples to flee. Decades later, only Taiwan still stands its ground, “**fending** off the persistent **aggravation**”.

The game asks players if Taiwan can stay safe by avoiding provocative action, or if it should “refrain from repeating the same mistakes of the last 30 years which allowed the communists to grow into the **behemoth** today”.

In player descriptions, the game describes the communists as “heavy-handed, reckless and **inept**” and accused of “widespread corruption, **embezzlement**, **exploitation**, **slaughter** and **defilement**”.

On their Facebook page, the developers – known as ESC Taiwan or Taiwan Overseas Strategic Communication Working Group (ESC) – said the attention had boosted downloads. On Wednesday it said the game had topped the Hong Kong App Store’s downloads chart on Tuesday night, before being taken down in the morning.

“We encourage users to change the country or region of their Apple ID in order to successfully download the game.”

The developers vowed not to actively filter or review any words or phrases in the game – a **nod** to recent controversies over censorship in Chinese-made or China-related games. It is unclear where ESC Taiwan is based.

The police warning over the game forms part of an ongoing crackdown on pro-democracy opposition in Hong Kong, where CCP control has steadily tightened around the once semi-autonomous city. In 2020 Beijing imposed the national security law on Hong Kong, with the city government’s **blessing**, **outlawing** a broad range of dissenting behaviours as criminal.

Critics have accused authorities of weaponising the law to target opposition voices, including activists, politicians, labour unions, journalists and media outlets, as well as children’s books and bookshops.

#### [2025-06-12 Ukraine war briefing: severely wounded soldiers next in prisoner exchanges](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/12/ukraine-war-briefing-severely-wounded-soldiers-next-in-prisoner-exchanges)

Russia and Ukraine are expected to exchange severely wounded soldiers on Thursday in the latest stage of a large-scale agreement to free more than 1,000 prisoners of war by each side. “Tomorrow, we will begin urgent ‘**sanitary** exchanges’ of severely wounded prisoners,” Russia’s top negotiator, Vladimir Medinsky, posted.

On Wednesday, a Ukrainian government agency announced that “the bodies of 1,212 fallen **defenders** were returned to Ukraine”. Russia’s top negotiator, Vladimir Medinsky, said Russia had “received the remains of 27 Russian soldiers”. Ukraine did not say how many bodies it returned to Russia.

Among the bodies returned on Wednesday were the remains of Ukrainian soldiers killed fighting in the Kharkiv, Lugansk, Donetsk, Zaporizhzhia and Kherson regions, Kyiv said, as well as those killed during Ukraine’s incursion into Russia’s Kursk region. Ukraine said its experts “will identify the **deceased** as soon as possible”.

The Ukrainian military said on Wednesday that it had struck a major Russian gunpowder plant in the western Tambov region, causing a fire. It **characterised** the plant as one of the main facilities in Russia’s military industrial complex, making gunpowder for small arms, artillery and rocket systems. The Tambov regional governor, Yevgeny Pervyshov, confirmed an attack by drones and a fire. The Ukrainian military also said it recorded explosions at an **ammunition** **depot** in Russia’s Kursk region and an airfield depot in Russia’s Voronezh region.

Volodymyr Zelenskyy said on Wednesday that Russia was determined to sow chaos in and destroy the south of his country as well as nearby Moldova and Romania, and called for increased pressure on Moscow to prevent further military threats. The Ukrainian president was addressing leaders of 12 south-east European leaders gathered in the Black Sea port of Odesa.

“Russian military plans are aimed at this region, and then at the borders with Moldova and Romania,” Zelenskyy said. “We need protection now. But even more, we need long-term guarantees that this will never happen again.” Odesa, site of three ports, has been a frequent target of Russian air strikes and came under a massive drone attack on Monday that targeted an emergency medical building, a maternity ward and residential buildings.

Much attention has focused on a possible Russian threat to Moldova, where the pro-European president, Maia Sandu, has accused Moscow of trying to destabilise her country and unseat her. Elections are being held in September. Sandu told the conference that Moldova “knows just what hybrid war is and is prepared to share its experience. Moldova is facing one of its most important elections. Russia wants to see Moldova turn away from Ukraine. More to the point, it wants to use Moldova against Ukraine and the EU.”

Serbia’s Russia-friendly president, Aleksandar Vucic, attended the Odesa summit where he refused to sign a joint declaration calling for tougher sanctions against Moscow. It was Vucic’s first visit to Ukraine since taking office over a decade ago. Vucic told Serbian media on Wednesday that the signing of the “anti-Russian” declaration wasn’t “easy and simple for us”, noting its mention of sanctions as one reason for **abstaining**. “But I would like to once again express my full gratitude to President Volodymyr Zelenskyy for the **exceptional** **hospitality** here in Odessa,” Vucic said.

Aircraft **leasing** companies have won a $4.7bn (£3.4bn) lawsuit against **insurers** over their planes **stranded** in Russia after the invasion of Ukraine in February 2022. Lisa O’Carroll reports that the high court in London ruled the planes had been “lost” in March 2022 and the six aircraft leasing companies, including Ireland’s AerCap and Dubai Aerospace Enterprise (DAE), could therefore recover losses from their “war risks insurers” AIG, Lloyd’s, Chubb and Swiss Re, as the cause of the loss was “an act or order of the Russian government”.

Restoration work started on Wednesday on Kyiv’s Unesco-listed 11th-century Saint Sophia **Cathedral** – one of the main symbols of Ukraine – after it was damaged by Russian strikes a day earlier. Zelenskyy said part of the cathedral’s **facade** collapsed. “For all people who truly know history and who are no strangers to Christianity, any threat of damage or destruction to St Sophia is absolutely unacceptable, catastrophic.”

Russia sent Tu-22M3 long-range bombers on a flight over the Baltic Sea on Wednesday, the defence ministry said, in the first such mission since Ukraine’s **stunning** 1 June attack where bombers were destroyed or badly damaged by drones at air bases in Siberia and the far north.

#### [2025-06-13 Israel launches strikes on ‘dozens’ of sites in Iran, targeting nuclear programme](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/13/israel-strikes-iran-nuclear-program-netanyahu)

Israel has launched an attack on Iran aimed at “dozens” of targets including its nuclear facilities, military commanders and scientists, claiming it took unilateral action because Tehran had begun to build nuclear warheads.

As Iran’s **supreme** leader, Ali Khamenei, threatened “severe punishment” against Israel, the Israeli military said on Friday morning that Iran had launched 100 drones aimed at Israel and that the country’s defences were focused on intercepted them.

Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, said the Israeli attack, which it is calling Rising Lion, was aimed at “**rolling back** the Iranian threat to Israel’s very survival”, adding that it would take “many days”.

“We struck at the heart of Iran’s nuclear **enrichment** programme,” Netanyahu said in a recorded televised address. “We struck at the heart of Iran’s nuclear weaponisation programme. We targeted Iran’s main enrichment facility in Natanz. We targeted Iran’s leading nuclear scientists working on the Iranian bomb. We also struck at the heart of Iran’s ballistic missile programme.”

Later, in comments that suggest the operation could be long and difficult, Netanyahu said: “Israeli citizens may have to remain in sheltered areas for lengthy periods of time.”

Iranian state media said the head of the Revolutionary Guards, Gen Hossein Salami, the army chief of staff, Maj Gen Mohammad Bagheri, and the commander of the Khatam al-Anbia joint forces headquarters, Maj Gen Gholamali Rashid, had been killed in the strikes, as well as six nuclear scientists, including Fereydoun Abbasi, the head of Iran’s Atomic Energy Organization from 2011 to 2013.

Abbasi survived an assassination attempt in 2010 that was part of a wave of targeted killings reportedly **masterminded** by the Mossad. Tehranchi was a **theoretical** physicist.

They appear to have been targeted in their homes. Iranian state television reported that children had been killed in at least one of the airstrikes, on a residential area of Tehran.

Later on Friday, Iraq said more than 100 Iranian drones had crossed its airspace, and a short time later neighbouring Jordan said its air force and defence systems had intercepted several missiles and drones that had entered its airspace for fear they would fall in its territory.

Donald Trump insisted that he had not been taken by surprise by the strike though he had previously warned Israel not to attack while the US was negotiating with Iran.

“Iran cannot have a nuclear bomb and we are hoping to get back to the negotiating table,” the US president told Fox News. “We will see. There are several people in leadership that will not be coming back.”

He added that the US would defend both the US and Israel in the event of Iranian retaliation. Haaretz reported that the US Air Force deployed an F-15 fighter squadron to Jordan two weeks ago to help intercept Iranian drones and cruise missiles if necessary, and Fox News quoted administration officials as saying Israel Iron Dome missile defence **shield** had been **replenished** recently with US interceptors.

Explosions were reported in Natanz, and the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) confirmed that the enrichment plant had been hit, but it added later that the Iranian authorities had not detected any increased radiation levels at the site.

In Israel, sirens and mobile phone alerts went off across Israel as it braced for a response. Tel Aviv’s Ben Gurion airport was closed to all flights.

Khamenei, Iran’s supreme leader, vowed that Israel “must await a severe punishment”.

“In the enemy’s attacks, several commanders and scientists were **martyred**. Their successors and colleagues will immediately carry on their duties, God willing,” Khamenei said, according to the Mehr news agency.

“With this crime, the Zionist regime has prepared a bitter and painful fate for itself – and it will undoubtedly receive it.”

Khamenei did not mention the US, but Iran’s foreign ministry said America – as Israel’s main supporter – would be held responsible for the consequences of “Israel’s **adventurism**”. In a statement, the ministry said the Israeli attack “exposes global security to unprecedented threat” and called on the international community to condemn it.

The Israel Defense Forces (IDF) said 200 fighter jets had taken part in the attack and issued a statement describing the operation as “a pre-emptive, precise, combined offensive to strike Iran’s nuclear programme”.

“Dozens of Israeli air force jets completed the first stage that included strikes on dozens of military targets, including nuclear targets in different areas of Iran,” the statement added.

Justifying the attack, Netanyahu said Iran was not only building up its supply of **fissile** enriched **uranium**, with enough for nine warheads, but also that it had taken unprecedented steps towards building bombs.

“In recent months, Iran has taken steps that it has never taken before, steps to weaponise this enriched uranium, and if not stopped, Iran could produce a nuclear weapon in a very short time. It could be a year. It could be within a few months, less than a year.

“That is why we have no choice but to act and act now. The hardest decision any leader has to make is sworn in danger before it is fully **materialised**,” he said, pointing to the western allies’ failure to stop Nazi aggression in the 1930s.

The IAEA board ruled on Thursday that Iran was in violation of its obligations under the nuclear non-proliferation treaty, for its failure to cooperate fully with IAEA inspections and **amassing** an estimated 400kg of highly enriched uranium. Western intelligence assessments until now have generally said that while Iran is stockpiling the components of a bomb, it had not taken the final decision to build one.

The attack on Iran comes a few days before a new round of US-Iranian talks were due in Oman aimed at finding a diplomatic solution to the **standoff** over Iran’s nuclear programme, which has expanded rapidly since 2018 when Trump withdrew from an international deal constraining it.

In the hours before the strikes began, the US president had acknowledged there was a risk of an Israeli attack on Iran and had sought to discourage it while talks with Tehran were still under way. “I don’t want them going in,” he said, warning it would “blow” the chances for a diplomatic solution. It was unclear how much, if any, warning Israel gave Washington of its strikes.

Trump’s secretary of state, Marco Rubio, said the US had not taken part in the Israeli attack. “Tonight, Israel took unilateral action against Iran,” Rubio said. “We are not involved in strikes against Iran and our top priority is protecting American forces in the region. Israel advised us that they believe this action was necessary for its self-defence.

“President Trump and the administration have taken all necessary steps to protect our forces and remain in close contact with our regional partners. Let me be clear: Iran should not target US interests or personnel.”

The Democratic senator Chris Murphy said Israel’s decision to act unilaterally was a **measure** of Trump’s weakness on the world stage.

“Israel’s attack on Iran, clearly intended to **scuttle** the Trump administration’s negotiations with Iran, risks a regional war that will likely be catastrophic for America and is further evidence of how little respect world powers – including our own allies – have for President Trump,” Murphy said.

Israel is likely to need US support in its defence if Iran responds with a missile barrage. In his speech, Netanyahu praised Trump for his efforts in confronting Iran but claimed Tehran was using the negotiations to “buy time”. He claimed Israel was not only acting in its own defence.

“I want to assure the civilised world, we will not let the world’s most dangerous regime get the world’s most dangerous weapons, and Iran plans to give those weapons – nuclear weapons – to its terrorist proxies that would make the nightmare of nuclear terrorism all too real,” he said. “The increasing range of Iran’s ballistic missiles would bring that nuclear nightmare to the cities of Europe and eventually to America.”

#### [2025-06-15 Israel and Iran broaden strikes during third day of escalating war](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/15/israel-hits-iran-energy-defence-ministry-conflict-escalates)

Israel and Iran have broadened their strikes against each other on the third day of an escalating war that has killed and injured hundreds of people, as Donald Trump called for an end to the conflict and warned Tehran against striking US targets in the region.

G7 leaders flying to Canada for a summit that starts on Monday are likely to try to use their time with the US president to urge him to keep the US out of the conflict and use his influence with Israel to broker a ceasefire.

Trump claimed he was working **behind the scenes** on a deal. “We will have PEACE, soon, between Israel and Iran!” he said in a post on his Truth Social platform. “Many calls and meetings now taking place. I do a lot, and never get credit for anything, but that’s OK, the PEOPLE understand.”

His envoys face a challenge that appears to be deepening by the day, however, with Israel and Iran widening their attacks, and the casualty tolls rising.

Israel attacked Iran’s energy industry and defence ministry on Saturday night, leaving a fuel depot ablaze through the night outside Tehran. It followed with evacuation warnings to civilians living near arms factories and on Sunday launched a rare daytime raid on the capital.

Iran fired at least 70 missiles towards Israel and several **evaded** air defences. They hit a refinery in the north, killed four people in a Palestinian-majority town near the Sea of Galilee and brought down part of a high-rise apartment block in Bat Yam, south of Tel Aviv.

It was the heaviest missile barrage the country has faced, and the damage was shocking to many Israelis. Despite enduring years of rockets from Gaza and Lebanon, and months of missiles fired from Yemen by the Houthis, none of those groups could deploy the scale or destructive power of the Iranian attacks.

At least 14 people were killed, three were missing and hundreds injured by Sunday morning. Benjamin Netanyahu visited the site of the Bat Yam strike on Sunday to see the damage and meet rescue workers. “Iran will pay a very heavy price for the **premeditated** murder of civilians, women and children,” the prime minister said.

In Iran the toll is many times higher, with at least 224 **fatalities** since Israel began its attacks, according to Iran’s health ministry. Spokesperson Hossein Kermanpour said on social media that 1,277 people had also been **hospitalised**, claiming that more than 90% of the casualties were civilians.

A finance analyst in Tehran said: “This is a massacre. The blasts haven’t stopped. Children are crying and we fear many civilians have been killed. There’s a smell of death in the air. I can’t stop crying.”

An Israeli strike on Sunday killed the intelligence chief of Iran’s Revolutionary Guards, Mohammad Kazemi, along with two other officers, the IRNA state media news agency reported.

“Three intelligence generals, Mohammad Kazemi, Hassan Mohaghegh and Mohsen Bagheri, were assassinated and fell as martyrs,” the agency said, citing a Revolutionary Guards statement.

Late on Sunday the Israeli military said that it was striking surface-to-surface missile sites in Iran, its latest move in three days of escalating conflict.

IDF spokesperson Nadav Shoshani wrote on X: “We are operating against this threat in our skies and in Iranian skies.”

As fuel depots outside Tehran blazed on Saturday, Trump **presided** over the US’s biggest military parade in decades. He later said the **arsenal** on display could be deployed against Iran if it targeted American assets.

The US president said in a social media post: “If we are attacked in any way shape or form by Iran, the full strength and might of the U.S. Armed Forces will come down on you at levels never seen before.”

There is little question that Israel would like the US to join its campaign. Only American weapons have the capability to reach parts of the Iranian nuclear project such as the Fordow uranium enrichment plant, which is buried deep under a mountain.

But while Iran has called off talks with the US on the future of its nuclear programme, and accused Washington of being Israel’s “partner” in the offensive launched on Friday, it has held off attacking US bases, embassies or other targets.

With most of its top military leaders assassinated, Israel claiming domination of Iranian airspace from western Iran to Tehran, and several key nuclear sites seriously damaged, the regime in Tehran faces an unprecedented threat to its stability and possibly even its survival.

Netanyahu has made no secret of his desire for regime change and on Sunday told Fox News that it “could certainly be the result” of the Israeli campaign.

Trump has been more wary, and his administration vetoed a recent Israeli plan to kill the country’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei. Israel briefed the White House on the “credible” plan for assassination, but it was rejected by Americans as a dangerous escalation.

The US president reiterated on Sunday as he **departed** for the G7 summit that he hoped for a deal between Iran and Israel, but added that “sometimes you have to fight it out”. He refused to say if he had asked Israel to pause its strikes.

Iran’s foreign minister, Abbas Araghchi, signalled on Sunday that Iran was open to attempts to de-escalate. If Israeli strikes on Iran stopped, “our responses will also stop”, he said, perhaps in an appeal to Trump’s promotion of himself as the ultimate dealmaker, and his **election pitch** that he would end America’s decades of overseas wars.

The US is already trying to promote an exchange of messages with Iran to “calm tensions” with Israel, although the effort falls short of formal mediation, the Haaretz newspaper reported quoting foreign sources.

Trump has spoken about the war with Iran’s ally Vladimir Putin and the **emir** of Qatar, Tamim bin Hamad al-Thani, who has been in direct contact with the Iranian president, Masoud Pezeshkian, since Friday.

Friedrich Merz, the German chancellor, called the leader of Oman, Sultan Haitham bin Tariq al-Said, who had been due to host US-Iran talks, a government spokesperson said. They discussed the importance of halting the conflict and stopping Iran getting nuclear weapons.

For Israel, Saturday night was the bloodiest of the conflict, despite its success in knocking out much of Iran’s military hierarchy and parts of its missile systems over the previous day.

An Israeli military official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said that even advanced air defences could not stop every missile when Iran launched large barrages, as it did on Saturday night.

“In these amounts, of hundreds of **projectiles**, sadly there will be hits,” the official said. “Even the greatest aerial defence system doesn’t get to 100%.”

Iran deployed about 70 missiles overnight, and dozens of drones, although Israel has a higher success rate intercepting those slower-moving projectiles. Over two nights, Iran fired about 270 missiles at Israel and 22 of them evaded air defences.

One of those appeared to target a refinery in the northern city of Haifa. In a statement to the Tel Aviv stock exchange, Bazan Group said there were no injuries at its plant but pipelines and transmission lines were damaged, forcing some facilities to shut down.

Netanyahu said he ordered the pre-emptive operation because Iranian progress towards developing nuclear weapons posed a critical security threat.

After taking out the top of the military hierarchy and vital nuclear scientists, as well as striking key parts of the nuclear programme, Israel appears to be widening its campaign.

It hit energy facilities overnight including an oil depot near Tehran that blazed through the night and a refinery in Bushehr province on the Gulf, and has told people living near arms factories in Iran to evacuate their homes.

An Israeli military official said in the coming days there would be more attacks on “**dual use**” facilities and strikes to prevent Iran expanding its stockpile of missiles, estimated to stand at about 2,000 before Friday.

#### [2025-06-16 Israel issues Tehran evacuation order as Iran threatens to leave nuclear weapons treaty | Iran's nuclear programme](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/16/iran-threatens-to-leave-nuclear-weapons-treaty-as-israeli-bombing-enters-fourth-day)

Israeli forces issued an evacuation order to residents of a large part of Tehran on Monday, warning them of the imminent bombing of “military infrastructure” in the area in a social media post very similar to those regularly directed at Palestinians in Gaza over the past 20 months.

The post on X was from the account of the Israel Defense Forces’ Arabic spokesperson, Col Avichay Adraee, and is a further sign of the **evolving nature** of the Israeli campaign against Iran, which began with attacks on air defences, nuclear sites and the military chain of command, but appears to have drifted towards a war of attrition focused on Iran’s oil and gas industry and on the capital.

In another sign of the changing targets of the Israeli offensive, Iran’s state TV announced on Monday evening that it was under attack during a live **transmission**.

The sound of an explosion could be heard, and the news **presenter** hurried off camera as dust and debris appeared in the studio. Cries of “Allahu Akbar” or “God is greatest” could be heard off-screen and the broadcast abruptly switched to pre-recorded programming. Live programming resumed some time later.

Adraee’s online post included a map depicting a significant area of the third district in northern Tehran shaded in red in the same manner he has presented evacuation orders for Palestinians.

“Dear citizens, for your safety, please leave the described area in the 3rd district of Tehran immediately,” the message said in Farsi.

“In the coming hours, the Israeli army will attack the military infrastructure of the Iranian regime in this area, as it has done in recent days in Tehran. Your presence in this area endangers your life.”

Later on Monday, US president Donald Trump urged everyone to immediately evacuate Tehran, and reiterated that Iran should have signed a nuclear deal with the United States.

“IRAN CAN NOT HAVE A NUCLEAR WEAPON. I said it over and over again! Everyone should immediately evacuate Tehran!” he said in a post on Truth Social.

Speaking to personnel at Tel Nof air force base, the Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, confirmed the evacuation orders.

“The Israeli air force controls the skies over Tehran. This changes the entire campaign,” he said.

“When we control the skies over Tehran, we strike regime targets, as opposed to the criminal Iranian regime which targets our civilians and comes to kill women and children. We tell the people of Tehran to evacuate, and we act.”

Netanyahu later said killing Iran’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Hosseini Khamenei, would “end the conflict” in what would be another **ominous** escalation.

After the surprise Israeli attack on Friday morning, Iran has carried out retaliatory missile strikes on Israeli cities, focusing on the most populated areas between Tel Aviv and the port of Haifa.

Both sides have targeted each other’s oil and gas facilities, increasing the threat of environmental disaster, and explosions were reported on Monday near oil refineries in southern Tehran.

Earlier on Monday, Iran threatened to leave the nuclear non-proliferation treaty (NPT) as Israeli bombing raids entered a fourth day, underlining the conflict’s potential to trigger a broader war and Tehran’s race to construct a nuclear weapon.

The human cost of the war continued to escalate with both sides broadening their range of targets, as G7 leaders convened in the Canadian Rockies with no clear plan to end the conflict. There were reports on Monday that Trump was refusing to sign a joint statement calling for the conflict to be scaled down.

“They should talk, and they should talk immediately,” Trump said of Tehran during the summit. “I’d say Iran is not winning this war.”

The Wall Street Journal reported on Monday that Iran was sending a message to Israel and the US through Arab **intermediaries** that it was seeking a cessation of hostilities and a resumption of talks on its nuclear programme.

The same report, however, said its stance was that it would only go back to the table if Israel halted its offensive. There was no sign on Monday of Israel **contemplating** a pause.

Iran’s health ministry said 224 people in Iran had been killed by Israeli attacks, 90% of them civilian, and more than 1,400 had been injured. Israel’s defence minister, meanwhile, threatened further bombing strikes on Tehran, where an **exodus** of residents has been reported, **clogging** roads out of the capital.

The Iranian Red Crescent said that three of its rescuers were killed in an Israeli airstrike in northwest Tehran, adding: “This incident is not only a crime against international humanitarian law but also a blatant attack on humanity and **morality**.”

In Israel, at least 23 civilians have been killed in Iran’s retaliatory missile strikes since Israel’s initial surprise attack on Friday morning, and nearly 600 have been injured, according to official sources.

The Iranian foreign ministry spokesperson, Esmaeil Baghaei, announced on Monday that Iran’s parliament, the Majlis, was preparing a bill that would withdraw the country from the 1968 NPT agreement, which **obliges** it to **forego** nuclear weapons and to **undergo** international inspections to verify **compliance**. Baghaei added that Tehran remained opposed to the development of weapons of mass destruction.

The country’s president, Masoud Pezeshkian, also insisted that Iran did not intend to develop nuclear weapons but would pursue its right to nuclear energy and research. He pointed out that Ali Khamenei, had issued a religious **edict** against weapons of mass destruction.

Israel is the only Middle East state with nuclear weapons and did not sign the NPT, but has never formally acknowledged its arsenal.

It is seeking to maintain its **monopoly** with airstrikes against Iranian nuclear facilities, claiming that Tehran was close to building a bomb. Previous assessments by US intelligence and the UN nuclear watchdog found no evidence that Iran had begun work on assembling a nuclear weapon.

Israeli critics of the offensive say it cannot destroy Iran’s **reserve** of nuclear **knowhow** – though Israel has targeted Iranian nuclear scientists, claiming to have killed 14 – and could push the leadership into ordering the assembly of nuclear warheads.

Rafael Grossi, head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, told the BBC it was very likely all the roughly 15,000 **centrifuges** at Iran’s biggest uranium enrichment plant at Natanz had been badly damaged or destroyed because of a power cut caused by an Israeli strike.

But he said there had been very limited or no damage at the separate Fordow plant.

There were reports on Monday of Israeli strikes on the Tehran headquarters of the Revolutionary Guards al-Quds force, an **expeditionary** arm deployed in foreign wars.

Despite Israeli claims to have air superiority over much of Iran, Iranian forces have still been able to launch ballistic missiles from their territory and some continue to evade Israel’s multi-layered air defences. Israel Defense Forces officials estimate that it is has been able to intercept 80-90% of Iran’s missiles, with 5-10% hitting actual residential areas.

Eight more Israelis were killed overnight by Iranian missile strikes, including four in Petah Tikva where a missile hit an apartment block. Three people died from blasts in Haifa and an elderly man was killed when his home collapsed from the shockwave from an explosion in Bnei Brak, east of Tel Aviv.

Iran’s Revolutionary Guards claimed to have begun “more powerful and deadly” strikes and to have found a way of causing **confusion** in Israeli air defence systems. There was no immediate way of independently verifying the claim.

US forces have so far helped Israel intercept Iranian missiles, but have not taken part, at least overtly, in offensive bombing operations. On Monday, however, Reuters quoted two unnamed US officials as saying the movement of more than 30 military **refuelling** aircraft to Europe was intended to give Trump more options in the Middle East. Such tankers allow warplanes to refuel in mid-air and enable more **sorties** a day in wartime.

US defence secretary Pete Hegseth said on Monday he had ordered the deployment of additional defensive capabilities to the Middle East, but did not disclose what military capabilities he sent to the region.

As Tehran residents evacuated the capital in increasing numbers, Israel’s defence minister, Israel Katz, threatened to make Tehranis “pay the price” for Ali Khamenei’s decision to keep firing missiles at Israel in retaliation for the Israeli attack.

The Iranian state-backed news agency Fars reported that the authorities had executed a man found guilty of spying for Israel’s intelligence agency, the Mossad. It was the third execution of an alleged spy in recent weeks.

#### [2025-06-16 Donald Trump repeats call for Russia to be readmitted at G7 summit in Canada](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/16/donald-trump-repeats-call-for-russia-to-be-readmitted-at-g7-summit-in-canada)

Donald Trump has displayed his **disdain** for the collective western values **supposedly** **championed** by the G7 group of industrialised countries by again demanding that Russia be **readmitted** to the group. He also said the war in Ukraine would not have happened if Moscow had been kept in the club.

Trump made his remarks in front of media, alongside Canada’s prime minister, Mark Carney, who is hosting the G7, at the start of the summit’s first round of talks.

Russia was thrown out of the G8 after it invaded Crimea in 2014, and Trump’s defence of Vladimir Putin came a day before the US president is scheduled to meet his Ukrainian counterpart, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, on the **fringes** of the summit. It will be the first meeting between the two men since Pope’s Francis’s funeral in April.

Zelenskyy is pressing for a reluctant Trump to respond to Putin’s refusal to agree a 30-day ceasefire by applying sanctions on Russia that the US Senate has already approved.

Trump, however, has shown little sign of losing patience, and late on Monday said he was still waiting to see whether a deal could be reached with Moscow.

“Sanctions costs us a lot of money. It costs the US a lot of money. You are talking about billions and billions of dollars,” he said.

Earlier in the day he repeated his opinion that expelling Russia from the G8 was a “big mistake”.

“You wouldn’t have that war,” he said. “You know you have your enemy at the table, I don’t even consider, he wasn’t really an enemy at that time.”

He blamed the former Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau and Barack Obama for Putin’s **expulsion**.

“Obama didn’t want him, and the head of your country didn’t want him,” Trump said, naming Trudeau several times and calling the ousting a mistake.

The European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, signalled that the EU would be asking the US and other G7 member states to tighten sanctions on Russia by lowering the **cap** at which Russian oil can be bought from $60 a barrel to $45.

The aim is to reduce Russian revenues from oil sales. The G7 originally set up the complex price cap, so the EU needs the support of all G7 states to lower it.

Von der Leyen told reporters: “To achieve peace through strength we must put more pressure on Russia to secure a real ceasefire, to bring Russia to the negotiating table, and to end this war.

“Sanctions are critical to that end. As a result of the G7 and EU sanctions combined, for example, Russian oil and gas revenues have fallen by almost 80% since the beginning of the war.”

The EU is preparing an 18th round of sanctions heavily focused on cutting off Russia’s oil revenues.

Ahead of his meeting with Trump, Zelenskyy said: “Russia **spits** in the face of everything the international community is trying to do to stop this war.”

He said the latest Russian attacks on energy infrastructure came right after Putin had spoken to Trump offering to act as a mediator in the Iran-Israel crisis.

“This war could have ended long ago if the world had reacted to Russia in a principled way instead of falling for manipulation and lies,” he said.

He said that unlike Russia, Ukraine had complied with US requests not to target its opponent’s energy facilities.

Trump also gave no obvious ground on tariffs in his bilateral meeting with Carney. “I’m a tariff person,” he said. “It’s simple, it’s easy, it’s precise and it just goes very quickly.

“I think Mark has a more complex idea, but also very good.”

Trump has imposed levies on steel, **aluminium**, cars and other Canadian products that do not comply with the **continental** free trade agreement’s rules of origin.

#### [2025-06-18 Malfunctions, overreactions and a steep learning curve: wargaming a Chinese attack on Taiwan](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/18/taiwan-war-games-china-attack)

A series of war games in Taiwan has highlighted significant vulnerabilities in how the island and its supporters would respond to a Chinese annexation attempt, as well as growing questions over how much reliance can be placed on the volatile Trump administration.

Last week former senior military and government officials from the US, Japan, and Taiwan convened in Taipei for a **tabletop** exercise, led by the Taipei School of Economics and Political Science Foundation. The event was described as the first civilian-led military simulation held in Taiwan, testing responses to a **hypothetical** attempt by China to annex the territory.

Three teams were presented with scenarios set in 2030 but based on China’s current strategies and their expected military advancements. A fourth team represented China’s People’s Liberation Army (PLA), while a control group of the games’ organisers drove proceedings and ran **feedback sessions**.

The escalating scenarios began with suspicious military movements inside China, and heightened propaganda, before progressing to large military drills near Taiwan, a blockade, and finally a missile attack and full-scale invasion. Along the way, surprise incidents were thrown at the teams, including a missile strike on a Taiwanese coastguard ship, Chinese restrictions on all international shipping nearby, and North Korea firing test missiles over Japan.

The exercises highlighted how much the defence of Taiwan **hinges** on **assumptions**, with for example, the US team quickly offering military defence to Taiwan before the scenarios escalated into a fully **fledged** war. Such **unequivocal** US support is by no means guaranteed.

The US refuses to confirm if it will defend Taiwan militarily, under a decades-old doctrine of “strategic **ambiguity**” designed to discourage either side from making provocative moves. Joe Biden signalled that – under his presidency at least – the US military would probably back Taiwan against a Chinese invasion.

The current US administration is still projecting an image of the superpower protector, but the **volatility** of Trump and his team has sparked concern about its continuing support for Taiwan.

“It is the politicians who decide whether to engage in conflict; the military determines how to conduct it,” said Adm Lee Hsi-min, former head of Taiwan’s armed forces and chair of the games’ co-host, the Center for Peace and Security.

The US team’s justification for its hard and early responses were to be “a step ahead of China”, hoping to deter it from escalating further in the face of an American show of strength. It pushed back on suggestions from the control team that they – alongside Taiwan and Japan – had “overreacted” by using a military response when China’s actions had not yet involved PLA deployment.

“The view from the US is that this part of the world, and this relationship is on a **hair trigger**, and the worry is that any incident of some significance could cause very rapid escalation,” said a US team member.

Analysts watching the games thought the US team’s responses showed there appeared to be clear trigger points for US involvement.

“The red line for Washington, based on the outcome of the exercise, seems to be Beijing’s **initiation** of a blockade,” said William Yang, a senior north-east Asia analyst for the International Crisis Group who witnessed the two days of games.

“But the lack of **coherence** and clarity in the Trump administration’s Taiwan policy has exacerbated scepticism toward Washington’s support for Taiwan since he won the election last November.”

The US team and control group were also focused on Taiwanese willingness to fight, with US leaders proposing formal recognition of Taiwan at one stage in part to boost local civilian and military morale. Taiwan’s military still struggles with recruitment and training, although US officials say they are pleased with recent progress.

“The ability of Taiwan to defend itself against Chinese aggression, and the willingness to do so has been increasing and that’s very positive,” said participant Adm Dennis Blair, a retired chief of the US Pacific Command and former director of national intelligence.

The games raised other vulnerabilities, particularly among the Taiwanese strategists, who were initially overcautious and then overreacted, according to the assessment of control group **supervisors**.

An early decision by the Taiwan team, to not respond to a PLA incursion inside the island’s 12-nautical mile marine border, was **ridiculed** by local media, and an attempt to deflect a key decision by saying it was for a country’s president was **chided** by organisers.

Yang said it highlighted the pressure on Taiwan to form a consistent plan on how and when to respond to China’s aggression. “Without a set of clear rules, Taiwan risks overdoing its responses, which would give China the legitimate reason to launch a military attack, or being caught off guard, which could lead to a rapid loss.”

Japan’s team also expressed concern about minimal communication from Taiwan, saying the team did not **adequately** convey what it wanted from Japan during scenarios.

“The tabletop exercise seemed quite realistic, especially in regards to Taiwan’s communication,” said participant Takei Tomohisa, a former chief of staff of Japan’s Maritime Self-Defence Force. “The exercise clearly showed limitations and some **malfunctions**.”

Yang said it revealed the impact of Taiwan’s non-involvement in regional military exercises with its neighbours, an event that would probably be seen as a red line by Beijing, but which also hampered Taiwan’s ability to coordinate with partners.

“It enhances the likelihood of setting the wrong expectations about how neighbouring countries might respond, which could lead to miscalculation in Taiwan’s own military planning,” Yang said.

Lee told reporters at the end of the exercise that the Taiwan team had experienced a steep learning curve, and shown big improvements and greater **agility** over the course of the four scenarios.

“We can lose 100 times in a war game, but we hope we can win the one time it happens in the real world.”

A final report will be submitted to the Taiwan government in coming weeks.

#### [2025-06-18 Israeli strikes have not knocked out Iran’s nuclear programme - or its nuclear ambitions](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/18/israels-gamble-on-force-could-push-iran-to-accelerate-nuclear-plans)

In just a few days of war, Israel has killed more than a dozen of Iran’s top nuclear scientists, taken out much of its top military hierarchy and attacked key parts of its nuclear programme.

It has been a powerful display of Israeli military and intelligence dominance, but has not critically damaged Iran’s widely dispersed and heavily protected nuclear programme, Israeli military commanders and international nuclear **proliferation** experts agree.

And far from curbing nuclear proliferation, Israel’s gamble on force could drive Iran to speed up its efforts to get a bomb if the current conflict ends without full destruction of the programme or a deal with **iron-clad** controls and broad inspection powers.

Israel’s initial attacks have delayed by a few months Iran’s ability to “break out”, or make a functioning nuclear weapon, an Israeli military official said, speaking on condition of anonymity.

But US intelligence officials believe Tehran was up to three years away from being able to deliver a weapon and not actively pursuing a bomb, CNN reported on Tuesday – which would make that delay relatively **inconsequential**.

Israeli prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, claimed he launched the attacks because Iran was on the threshold of having a nuclear bomb. But even if that is true, strikes so far will not have bought much more time, and Israel may not be able to do more lasting damage without US help.

What the attacks have achieved is to **stir** up fear among the Iranian leadership and anger among Iran’s population. The hatred many Iranians **harbour** for their own government did not blunt the horror of a missile strike that killed dozens of children in their homes, and Israeli orders to evacuate entire neighbourhoods evoked the **grim** **spectre** of Gaza’s fate.

Israel developed its own nuclear arsenal as a deterrent, though it has never officially acknowledged what is an open secret. Many in Iran are convinced they need the same, and this war will probably have mitigated public **resentment** of the cost of those advances.

After the collapse over the past year of regional proxies that had served as the regime’s defensive shield, there was a greater focus inside Iran on the possibility of a nuclear programme, according to Sima Shine, Iran **specialist** and former head of research at Israel’s the Mossad intelligence agency.

“I have never seen so much talking about nuclear military capability as I saw in the last year and a half,” Shine said. Most focused on Iran’s decision not to build a bomb, rather than its capacity to do so, but the decision to hold back can easily be set aside.

“If the war ends without destroying the nuclear programme, allowing Iran to break out, they probably will do it,” she said.

A western military official with experience in the region agreed that Israel’s attacks, although framed as pre-emptive strikes, are just as likely to be a spur to proliferation. “My own view is that if they have the capacity after this, they will go as fast as they can to get a nuclear weapon.”

The biggest obstacle to the military destruction of Iran’s nuclear project is the facility at Fordow near the holy city of Qom, buried so deep under a mountain that it is out of reach of even Israel’s most powerful munitions.

It houses centrifuges and much of the country’s highly enriched uranium, and the only bombs that might be able to destroy it are the US’s most powerful **bunker-busting** munitions.

Amid Israeli **euphoria** at the impact of the first strikes, national security adviser Tzachi Hanegbi warned the Israel Defense Forces cannot dismantle Iran’s nuclear programme alone.

“It cannot be done via **kinetic** means,” he told Israeli media. The military can instead create conditions for a long-term deal, brokered by the US that would totally block Iran’s nuclear programme, added.

Netanyahu has left little doubt that he would prefer US military cooperation to a diplomatic solution, and has been encouraging Trump to abandon the anti-war stance that helped bring him to power. “I understand America first, I don’t understand America dead,” he told ABC TV in an interview.

The Israeli leader dreams not only of destroying the nuclear programme but also of regime change in Tehran. But with each missile that lands in civilian areas, his appeals to the Iranian people sound more hollow on the ground.

“We underestimate the **psychological** impact of the Gaza war, including on Iranians who hate the government,” said Vali Nasr, professor of international affairs at Johns Hopkins University.

“Gaza also has a bad, **vicious** government that has been used as justification for action against it. Israel has shown a kind of willingness to kill at will, especially civilians.”

Fear of Israeli attacks has been amplified by western tolerance of mass killings, and extreme military tactics that former Israeli prime minister Ehud Olmert has described as war crimes.

“There was a belief that the international liberal order would keep Israel in check, that Europe and the US would not tolerate Israel using its military might with abandon,” Nasr said. Confidence in any capacity to restrain was **blown apart** in the rubble of Gaza.

If Trump ultimately decides to stay out of this war, and Iran is slow to accept a deal that would curb its programme, Israel may still have military options to inflict more lasting damage at Fordow.

“There has always been a **fixation** in Israel and in the world with bombing the nuclear sites. Even if it is impossible to destroy Fordow from the air, other methods exist,” said Alex Grinberg, an analyst and former Iran researcher in the IDF intelligence research division.

Israel’s capture of much of an extensive nuclear archive likely gave it access to plans for Fordow, which could make it easier to **cripple** support systems, block access or even send in special forces to destroy the plant in a ground operation.

There is precedent for these approaches in other Israeli raids. An attack this week on the electricity supply to another enrichment facility, at Natanz, destroyed centrifuges by causing them to spin out of control.

Last year Israel sent special forces **commandos** to destroy an underground Hezbollah missile factory deep inside Syria. Fordow is heavily defended, but as Israel now claims to dominate the airspace in western Iran, it could fly in elite teams in on a C-130 aircraft to attempt to storm the site.

Despite Netanyahu’s preference for a campaign of physical destruction, a deal to restrict Iran’s nuclear activities and through a strict inspection regime would probably offer a more lasting shutdown of Iran’s nuclear ambitions, said David Albright, president of the Institute for Science and International Security.

“One of the problems with Israel’s strategy is that if they leave, if they stop bombing, then Iran can rebuild. And then they have to start bombing again.”

#### [2025-06-18 Trump undecided on joining war on Iran as Khamenei warns him not to attack](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/jun/18/iran-threatens-us-with-irreparable-damage-if-trump-joins-war)

Donald Trump said he had not decided whether or not to take his country into Israel’s new war, as Iran’s supreme leader said the US would face “irreparable damage” if it deployed its military to attack.

Ayatollah Ali Khamenei said Israel had made a “huge mistake” by launching the war, in his first comments since Friday.

“The Americans should know that any US military intervention will undoubtedly be accompanied by irreparable damage,” he said in a statement read out by a presenter on state TV.

Tehran was preparing missiles and other equipment to strike US bases in the region if Washington joined the war, the New York Times reported, citing US intelligence officials.

Hours later, Trump said Iranian officials had made contact to request a meeting and proposed a visit to the White House.

He told reporters on the White House lawn that he felt “it’s very late to be talking” but he had not yet made a final decision about entering the war.

“I may do it, I may not do it. I mean, nobody knows what I’m going to do,” he said.

That lack of clarity about what comes next may extend to the president himself, who was still in deal-making mode, one ally said. The US is understood to want to keep all its options open to exert maximum pressure on Tehran.

It was moving air tankers for midair refuelling to Spain and Greece, where they could be used to supply B-2 bombers on a long run from the Whiteman airbase in Missouri to Iran.

It is understood that no request has been put to the UK for use of the Diego Garcia airbase in the Indian Ocean for a B-2 bombing run or of the Akrotiri airbase in Cyprus for the refuelling aircraft, though the latter is considered likely.

Other US military assets are on their way. The Pentagon ordered the USS Nimitz aircraft carrier to sail from Singapore to the Middle East, which is expected to take between five and seven days. The USS Carl Vinson is already in the Arabian Sea.

Qatar and Oman were trying to mediate a ceasefire, the Jerusalem Post reported, hours after at least one aircraft associated with the Iranian government flew to Muscat in Oman, flight tracking showed.

Iran sent a message that it was willing to negotiate a deal with the US, but Israel needed to “calm things down”, a source told the Jerusalem Post.

Trump’s claim that Iranians had offered to come to the White House for talks prompted an enraged response from Iran’s mission to the UN. “No Iranian official has ever asked to grovel at the gates of the White House,” the mission posted on a social media account.

The foreign ministers of the UK, France and Germany are planning to meet their Iranian counterpart, Abbas Araghchi, in Geneva on Friday in what could represent a potential diplomatic breakthrough after five days of Israeli bombing.

Final confirmation from Tehran is still pending, but if confirmed it would represent the first face-to-face diplomatic meeting since the crisis began.

In a social media post late on Wednesday, Araghchi wrote that Iran “remain[s] committed to diplomacy. As before, we are serious and forward-looking in our outlook.”

The talks in Geneva will focus on how Iran is willing to reduce or close its nuclear programme, and will also be attended by the EU foreign policy chief, Kaja Kallas.

But Araghchi has refused to meet Donald Trump’s envoy, Steve Witkoff, on the grounds that the US is supporting Israel’s attacks.

The Trump administration had initially distanced itself from the war, saying Israel had acted alone, but in recent days it has stepped up its rhetoric and its military presence in the Middle East.

Iran’s Fordow nuclear facility is at the heart of demands for the US to join the war, both in Israel and from hawks in Washington.

Damage from strikes on other facilities could be repaired within months, Israeli military officials and nuclear experts say. Destroying or crippling Fordow would have much more of a long-term impact.

It is buried deep below a mountain near the holy city of Qom, and the only munitions that could possibly damage or destroy it are the most powerful US bunker-buster bombs, which only US B-2s can carry.

Israel’s national security adviser, Tzachi Hanegbi, said the war had been an entirely Israeli campaign but it “will not end without damaging Fordow”, in an interview with Israel’s Channel 12 television.

If the US does not join, Israel may still have military options but they would be riskier and more complicated. It could fly in special operations troops for a ground operation, like one that targeted a missile factory in Syria last year, or disable Fordow by attacking critical support systems such as its power supply.

Israel says it launched the war in self-defence, to destroy Iran’s nuclear programme, but Netanyahu and several ministers have made no secret of their desire for regime change.

Trump reportedly vetoed an Israeli plan to assassinate Khamenei, and critics have questioned why Israel targeted civilian institutions such as the state broadcaster.

On Wednesday, the defence minister, Israel Katz, said Israel was bombing “symbols of power” in Iran and suggested the regime could be in its last days.

“A tornado is sweeping through Tehran,” he wrote in a post on X. “Symbols of power are being bombed and collapsing, from the broadcasting authority and soon other targets, and masses of residents are fleeing. This is how dictatorships collapse.”

The escalating conflict has prompted a growing international chorus of concern. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, offered to mediate between Iran and Israel, after one of his top diplomats urged Washington not to consider “speculative options” for intervention.

On a sixth night of attacks, Israel bombed a site that manufactured uranium centrifuges and also said it had targeted a missile component factory and destroyed five attack helicopters.

Iran’s military has been battered but not fully destroyed. An advanced Israeli drone was shot down on Wednesday, despite Israel claiming control of the skies over western Iran and Tehran. Overnight, Iran fired 15 missiles at Israel.

The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) confirmed that Israeli strikes had hit two centrifuge productions in Iran, one in the capital and another just outside it.

Iran has reported at least 224 deaths from Israeli attacks, mostly civilians, although it has not updated that toll for several days. A US-based watchdog, Human Rights Activists in Iran, says at least 585 people have been killed and more than 1,300 injured.

Iranian attacks on Israel have killed 24 people, all civilians. Israeli air defences have intercepted most of the 400 missiles fired by Tehran, with only about 10% hitting targets inside the country.

Israel could become more vulnerable if the war continues much longer as supplies of its most effective air-defence missiles are running low, the Wall Street Journal has reported, citing a US official.

Its Arrow interceptors are complex missiles that cost several million dollars each, and they have a long production process.

Although the US has been supporting Israel’s defences with Thaad ground-based systems, interceptions by F-16 jets and missiles launched by the navy, it does not have unlimited supplies of these defensive systems either.

Iran is thought to still have a substantial proportion of the estimated 2,000 missiles that were in its arsenal at the start of the war. Israeli strikes have focused on launcher systems that are needed to fire them.