---
layout: post
title:  "25年11月新闻摘选"
date:   2025-11-03 19:09:00 +0800
---

<style type="text/css">
  pre code {
    white-space: pre-wrap;
    word-wrap: break-word;
    overflow-wrap: break-word;
  }
</style>

* 目录
{:toc #markdown-toc}

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/02/mexican-mayor-killed-during-day-of-the-dead-celebrations

“No line of investigation is being ruled out to clarify this **cowardly** act that took the life of the mayor,” García Harfuch added.

On Sunday, hundreds of Uruapan residents took to the town’s streets to accompany the funeral **procession**.

At the head of the procession, a man led Manzo Rodríguez’s black horse, with one of the mayor’s signature hats placed on the **saddle**. A group of musicians, also dressed in black, followed and played **mariachi** songs.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/03/ukraine-war-briefing-trump-not-really-considering-supplying-tomahawks

Whereas Russian crude amounted to virtually all of the STAR refinery’s crude **intake** in October and September of about 210,000 bpd. 

Tupras was also likely soon to completely phase out Russian crude imports so that it could maintain fuel exports to Europe without **falling foul** of the EU’s incoming sanctions.

At least 200 Russian soldiers had **penetrated** Pokrovsk’s defences, Kyiv said last week, while the Institute for the Study of War assessed that others were closing in on its outskirts in a **pincer-shaped** movement.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/03/israel-remains-hostages-gaza-hamas

On Saturday night, Moran Harari urged Israel to **have restraint**.

It is unclear if the Palestinians were **recovered** from Gaza by troops during the war.

Israel’s prime minister said earlier on Sunday that “there are still **pockets** of Hamas” in parts of Gaza controlled by Israeli forces.

The ministry, part of the Hamas-run government and **staffed by** medical professionals, maintains detailed records viewed as generally reliable by independent experts.

Israel, which has denied accusations by a UN commission of inquiry and others of committing genocide in Gaza, has disputed the ministry’s figures without providing a **contradicting toll**.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/03/afghanistan-earthquake-death-toll-reportedly-damages-blue-mosque

The quake also damaged the Blue Mosque of Mazar-i-Sharif, a 15th-century landmark famed for its **vibrant** **tiles**.

Yousaf Hammad said most of the injured suffered minor wounds and were **discharged** after receiving initial treatment.

In Mazar-i-Sharif, footage on social media showed the quake had caused some damage to the Blue Mosque, with AFP reporting that pieces of the **ornate** structure, particularly from one of its **minarets**, had broken off and fallen to the ground.

The **impoverished** country often faces difficulty in responding to such natural disasters, especially in remote regions.

Buildings in Afghanistan tend to be **low-rise** constructions, mostly of concrete and brick, with homes in rural and **outlying** areas made from mud bricks and wood.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/03/xi-jinping-cracks-joke-about-spying-with-phones-given-to-south-korean-president

Xi, who is not known for public displays of humour, laughed and smiled as Lee’s **quip** was translated into Chinese, before displaying some sharp **wit** of his own.

The **lighthearted** exchange took place as Xi and Lee exchanged gifts on the sidelines of the Apec summit in the South Korean city of Gyeongju – Xi’s first visit to the country in more than a decade.

The leaders’ conversation, captured by TV cameras, generated huge media interest in South Korea as Xi rarely **cracks jokes**, especially on a subject as sensitive as espionage.

A state media live feed of the **trio** walking into Tiananmen Square caught Putin’s interpreter saying in Chinese: “Biotechnology is continuously developing.”

“Human organs can be continuously transplanted. The longer you live, the younger you become, and even achieve **immortality**,” he added.

Lee’s spokesperson, Kim Nam-joon, said the moment of **levity** was proof that the two leaders had bonded during several meetings at the two-day summit.

Xi, who like Lee is a **keen** player of the ancient strategy board game, described the board as “**exquisite**”, according to South Korean media.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/03/why-is-donald-trump-threatening-military-intervention-in-nigeria

Here’s what we know so far about the **unfolding** situation.

“If the Nigerian government failed to stop the killings, Washington would “immediately stop all aid and assistance to **Nigeria**” and could “go into that now **disgraced** country, **guns-a-blazing**”.

His statement reflected renewed domestic political pressure to appear tough on the **marginalisation** or persecution of Christians abroad, a theme that resonates strongly with parts of his rightwing, **evangelical** base.

Nigeria is officially **secular** but almost **evenly** divided between Muslims (53%) and Christians (45%), with the remaining population practising African traditional religions.

In parts of central Nigeria, deadly clashes between **itinerant** Muslim **herders** and **predominantly** Christian farming communities are rooted in competition over land and water but exacerbated by religious and ethnic differences. The herders often claim reprisals for the killing of their people and **cattle**, while local communities see the attacks as ethnic cleansing targeting their settlements.

**Priests** and **pastors** have increasingly been kidnapped for **ransom**.

In the north-east, Boko Haram and its **splinter groups** such as Islamic State West Africa Province (ISWAP) have waged an insurgency since 2009, killing tens of thousands and displacing millions.

In the north-west, heavily armed criminal gangs – often labelled “**bandits**” – carry out mass kidnappings and raids that affect both Muslim and Christian communities.

Meanwhile, in the south-east, separatists seeking to revive the **defunct** state of Biafra have been linked to violence against government institutions and civilians, with most victims being Christians.

**Vigilante** groups have filled the vacuum in some states.

Meanwhile, his presidential spokesperson, Daniel Bwala, described Trump’s post as “a **miscommunication**”.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/05/chinese-astronauts-delayed-spacecraft-struck-by-debris-tiangong-space-station-shenzhou-20

“The Shenzhou-20 **crewed** spacecraft is suspected to have been struck by a small piece of **orbital** debris,” said the China **Manned** Space Agency in a statement.

Authorities didn’t say when the incident is believed to have occurred. There was no indication of any issues earlier this week, with state media reporting on the two crews enjoying a meal of **baked** chicken cooked on the space station’s first ever oven, delivered by the Shenzhou-21 team.

“Shenzhou-22 and the Long March 2F (launcher) were already on **standby**.

The returning Shenzhou-20 team’s commander, Chen Dong, already holds a Chinese record for the longest **cumulative** spaceflight.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/05/ukraine-war-briefing-zelenskyy-visits-troops-near-embattled-pokrovsk

Russian forces had pushed further into Pokrovsk and its **environs**.

The city administration reported an explosion at the Sterlitamak Petrochemical Plant that caused its water **treatment** facility to partially collapse. The Ukrainian military general staff said there was “**considerable** damage” to the plant.

Russian military **reservists** will now have to guard oil refineries against Ukrainian drone strikes after Vladimir Putin signed a law on Tuesday extending their **entanglement** in the war effort. The Russian ruler also signed a law allowing military **conscription** all year round whereas previously it was possible only during limited periods in autumn and spring.

Italy summoned Russia’s deputy ambassador on Tuesday to protest at what it said were “**vulgar**”, “disturbing” and “unacceptable” remarks by Moscow’s foreign ministry spokeswoman Maria Zakharova, who linked the deadly collapse of a tower in Rome to Italy’s military support for Ukraine. “Italy will not alter its foreign policy stance or its principles in response to reckless **verbal** attacks”.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/05/malaysia-defends-trump-us-trade-deal

Among the critics of the deal is former Malaysian prime minister Mahathir Mohamad, who said **provisions** in the agreement amounted to “handing over” the country’s independence.

But public **discourse** has centred on an article of the agreement published by the White House.

“With this US deal, Malaysia will now have to work extra hard to ensure it isn’t **ensnared** in other countries’ restrictions” Noor said, adding that the country would also have to be “**diligent** about not **sleepwalking** into long-term, strategic alignment against its own interests.”

The investment, trade and industry ministry was quick to create a **microsite** and release a 15-page Frequently Released Questions (FAQs) to address concerns.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/05/japan-deploys-soldiers-to-contain-surge-in-bear-attacks-in-akita

Unexpected encounters with bears are being reported almost daily in the lead up to hibernation season as the animals **forage** for food.

Officials say the soldiers will not use firearms to **cull** the bears.

Fumitoshi Sato said: “Every day, bears **intrude** into residential areas in the region.”

A team of white-helmeted soldiers wearing **bulletproof** **vests** and carrying bear **spray** and net launchers set up a trap near an **orchard**.

The Japanese self-defence forces are already **understaffed**.

On Wednesday, a woman in Akita city spotted two bears on a **persimmon** tree in her garden.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/06/philippines-state-of-emergency-typhoon-kalmaegi-death-toll

Marcos’s “state of national **calamity**” declaration would allow the government to disburse emergency funds faster and prevent food **hoarding** and overpricing.

The problems may have been made worse by years of **quarrying** that caused clogging of nearby rivers.

A corruption scandal involving **substandard** or non-existent flood control projects across the Philippines has sparked public outrage and street protests in recent months.

Ferries and fishing boats were prohibited from **venturing** out to increasingly rough seas during the typhoon.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/06/belgium-to-hold-security-meeting-after-drone-sightings-at-airports-and-military-bases

The skies were also closed over Liège airport, an important hub for **freight** transport, leading to further cancellations, delays and **diversions**.

Lithuania closed its two largest airports last month after **helium** balloons, suspected of carrying **contraband** cigarettes. Lithuania’s prime minister later called the **intrusions** “hybrid attacks” in an echo of the term used to describe destabilisation efforts by Moscow.

Belgium’s defence minister said the incidents appeared to be coordinated to **foment** disruption, involving large drones flying in **formation**.

Last week, Russia’s former president Dmitry Medvedev, known for his **bombastic** social media posts, called Francken an **imbecile**.

The **spat** came after Belgium disappointed EU allies by blocking a plan to loan Ukraine €140bn based on Russian frozen assets held in Brussels.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/06/sudanese-militia-group-accused-of-war-crimes-agrees-to-a-ceasefire

Hours before news emerged that the group had agreed to a ceasefire, satellite images appeared to show its **recruits** hiding bodies in mass graves.

The ceasefire agreement is thought to have involved the RSF’s **principal** backer, the UAE.

The RSF appeared to be conducting systematic body disposal, with mass graves being dug in trenches and **pits**.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/06/israel-carries-out-wave-of-airstrikes-on-southern-lebanon

Under the terms of the deal, Hezbollah is to disarm, both parties are **meant to** stop firing on each other.

Thursday’s strikes were unusual in their intensity and for being **preceded** by an evacuation warning.

Lebanon’s government has committed to disarming Hezbollah and ensuring the **monopoly** of weapons lies with the state.

Israel has pressed the Lebanese government to move more quickly on disarmament, but it has said that to do so would risk **inflaming** internal civil **strife**.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/06/ukraine-war-briefing-bulgaria-moves-to-seize-russian-refinery-while-poland-seeks-to-be-us-gas-conduit

With international action progressively choking off Russia’s **petroleum** exports, Poland said on Wednesday that it was working on a deal to import liquefied natural gas from the US to supply Ukraine and Slovakia.

Moscow’s forces appear to be tightening their grip on Pokrovsk, Pjotr Sauer reports, with street fighting **raging across** the ruined city in eastern Ukraine.

Emil Kastehelmi posted: “Ukraine may be repeating a **costly** mistake in Pokrovsk … seen for example in Vuhledar and Kursk – a reluctance to conduct a controlled, militarily **justified** withdrawal from a threatened salient when the situation no longer favours the defender.”

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/06/mexicans-outraged-by-public-sex-assault-on-president

The groping of Mexico’s Claudia Sheinbaum by a **drunken** man has sparked outrage among women, many of whom saw their own fears and experiences reflected in her **plight**.

For some women, watching the country’s first female president being **groped** in public was a personal **affront**.

“I felt angry, enraged and **impotent**.”

“The issue of assault is like the base level on the violence **thermometer** and it **culminates** in **femicide**,” said De la Rosa.

The groping incident prompted **indignation** across the political spectrum.

“This assault, this touching that is so **invasive** of our bodies as women.”

Alicia Gutiérrez, a 40-year-old nurse, is **keenly** aware of the dangers facing women on public transport: often, she says, men get just a bit too close and once a man started **fondling** himself in front of her on a bus.

Alejandro Moreno suggested the incident may have been staged to **distract** the public from cartel violence.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/07/chinas-latest-aircraft-carrier-enters-service-to-extend-reach-into-high-seas

The vessel is one of the most high profile signs of his long-running efforts to **overhaul** and modernise the People’s Liberation Army (PLA).

The KJ-600 early warning and control plane has been successfully tested during its sea **trials**.

China’s navy said it launched the latest J-35 **stealth** fighter and J-15T heavy fighter from the Fujian.

China’s shipbuilding operates at an **unrivalled** pace but is secretive, and observers **scour** state media alerts and satellite images for signs of the latest developments and innovations.

This year the PLA has been testing several new **barge** ships, designed to create a **loading dock** from almost a kilometre out from shore, to bypass **rough seas** and rocky coastlines.

Taiwan’s defensive strategies had long included plans to move its war planes from the vulnerable west coast to the east, where they were protected by a **mountain range**.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/08/taiwan-vice-president-presses-case-at-eu-parliament-for-joint-efforts-to-counter-china

“Peace in the Taiwan Strait is essential to global stability and economic **continuity**, and international opposition against unilateral changes to the status quo by force cannot be **overstated**.”

“In an era marked by increasing **fragmentation**, volatility and rising authoritarianism” she added, to a standing **ovation** in a small chamber of the parliament.

She also mentioned China’s disruptions of global supply chains – likely a reference partly to Beijing’s **throttling** of rare earth exports to the EU earlier this year.

China’s **mission** to Europe on Saturday criticised the EU parliament for allowing her to carry out “separatist activities” in its building despite China’s opposition – adding it had made a **representation** to the European side.

The trip and speech were kept **under wraps** because of security concerns.

Ben Bland said the EU and Taiwan could do much more to deepen ties for mutual benefit in the face of worsening US-China **rivalry**.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/09/more-than-100000-evacuated-in-the-philippines-as-fung-wong-intensifies-into-super-typhoon

The super-typhoon crossed over the north of the archipelago’s most populous island, Luzon, with **torrential rain**, sustained winds of 115mph (185km/h) and **gusts** of up to 140mph (225km/h).

Tropical cyclones with sustained winds of 115mph (185km/h) or higher are categorised in the Philippines as a super-typhoon, a designation adopted to underscore the urgency tied to more extreme weather **disturbances**.

Warmer oceans allow typhoons to strengthen rapidly and a warmer atmosphere holds more **moisture**, meaning heavier rainfall.

More than 1.2 million people have been **pre-emptively** evacuated across the country.

Earlier on Sunday, Catanduanes was already being **lashed** by wind and rain, with storm surges sending waves **hurtling** over streets and flood waters rising in some areas.

In Guinobatan, a town of about 80,000 people in Albay province, verified video showed streets transformed into **raging torrents**.

Pope Leo **offered prayers** for the predominantly Catholic nation. “I pray for the **deceased** and their families, for the injured and the displaced,” he said on Sunday.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/08/us-china-aircraft-carriers-naval-fleet-defence

In a new era of state competition, Aircraft carriers remain an attractive resource for projecting power and conducting harder **edged** diplomacy.

It is a demonstration of Beijing’s fast-growing military power: its first aircraft carrier, the Liaoning, completed in 2012, was built from a **hulk** first made in the Soviet Union in the late 1980s and sold on by Ukraine after its collapse.

**Ironically**, China has also invested heavily in anti-ship missiles to try to protect its coast from the US. But Beijing clearly sees “aircraft carriers as an **indispensable** element in building a navy that can independently project power and influence globally”, because they remain “unrivalled in their flexibility” and are “**incredibly** useful in a whole range of potential conflict scenarios”.

Their use so far has been as a form of **floating** diplomacy.

For now, aircraft carriers are not expected to meet a military threat with the tactical **sophistication** of Ukraine, never mind a peer-level opponent.

The Soviet **rule of thumb** in the cold war was that it would take 12 conventional missiles to bring down a super-carrier.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/10/super-typhoon-fung-wong-philippines

More than 1.4 million people were evacuated across the country as the storm triggered flash flooding, storm surges, landslides and **gale-force** winds. Deadly **mudslides** had killed least six people across the country.

Having a second typhoon hit so soon after Kalmaegi may have worsened the destruction, as torrential rain fell upon already **soaked** and destabilised soils. In northern Luzon, where mudslides killed a number of children, civil defence authorities said the ground had already been **saturated** by heavy rains.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/11/china-co2-emissions-flat-or-falling-for-past-18-months-analysis-finds

Rapid increases in the deployment of solar and wind power generation – which grew by 46% and 11% **respectively** in the third quarter of this year – meant the country’s energy sector emissions remained flat, even as the demand for electricity increased.

China’s CO2 emissions were unchanged from a year earlier in the third quarter of 2025, thanks **in part** to declining emissions in the travel, **cement** and steel industries.

Last week, the UN secretary general, António Guterres, said the world was facing a “**moral** failure and deadly **negligence**” if governments failed to limit global heating to 1.5C.

Experts say those targets are too **modest** to **stave off** global catastrophe and a long way from the 30% cut that is feasible and necessary.

But China has a record of **underpromising** and **overdelivering** on climate targets.

Myllyvirta said some areas of the economy were **bucking** the **decarbonisation** trend.

China is also on track to miss its target for cutting carbon intensity – the CO2 emissions per unit of **gross** domestic product – between 2020 and 2025. This means steeper **reductions** will be necessary if the country is to hit its 2030 goal of reducing carbon intensity by 65%, compared with 2005.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/11/china-removes-gay-dating-apps-blued-finka-apple-android-lgbt-rights

**As of** Tuesday, Blued and Finka were unavailable on Apple’s app store and several Android platforms.

“Based on an order from the Cyberspace Administration of China, we have removed these two apps from the China **storefront** only.”

**Homosexuality** is legal in China.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/11/japan-china-row-takaichi-taiwan-conflict-military-deployment

“The so-called Taiwan **contingency** has become so serious that we have to anticipate a worst-case scenario.”

“We have no choice but cut off that dirty neck that has been **lunged** at us without hesitation.”

Japan has long **wrestled** with the question of how it would respond to a conflict between China and Taiwan, which lies just 100km from its westernmost island, **Yonaguni**, in the East China Sea.

Lin Jian said Xue’s post was a response to Takaichi’s “**wrongful** and dangerous” remarks on Taiwan.

“China strongly urges Japan to **reflect** on its historical **culpability** on the Taiwan issue.”

“Such behaviour clearly exceeds diplomatic **etiquette**.”

This latest spat started just a week after Beijing accused Takaichi of “**egregious**” behaviour by meeting with a senior adviser to Taiwan’s president.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/12/china-taiwan-statements-longer-term-strategy

“The aim is to **belittle** Taiwan’s international standing, to achieve the political objective of **eliminating** Taiwan’s sovereignty.”

**Retrocession** day, on 25 October is celebrated in Taiwan to mark the end of Japanese colonial rule, but Beijing has **recast** it as the day Taiwan was returned to China – specifically the China now ruled by the CCP.

Germany’s foreign minister said his country’s long standing position opposed “violent change” in the status quo that keeps the **tenuous** peace in the Taiwan Strait.

“Those who only call for no change of the status quo across the Taiwan Strait are actually aiding and **abetting** ‘Taiwan independence’ separatist activities**,**”

“Every inch of Taiwan Province, China, is **vibrant** under the “Jilin-1” space satellite’s perspective.”

In Taiwan, people and officials called the photos **voyeuristic**.

“If the point that China is trying to make with these satellite pictures is that it owns everything it took pictures of, then that’s just plain **immature**.”

Chinese officials sought to brush off the **characterisation**. “It is normal for Chinese satellites to look at the **magnificent** mountains and rivers of China’s Taiwan.”

These moves could help “prepare ground” for Xi seeking US **concessions** on its protection of Taiwan.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/12/new-hongqi-bridge-in-south-west-china-collapses-into-mountainside

A newly opened bridge in south-west China collapsed on Tuesday, sending **slabs of concrete** and **plumes of dust** into the **mountainside** and water below.

The bridge was part of a national highway linking Sichuan and Tibet, which runs through a **seismically** active part of China.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/12/beijing-court-appeal-jailed-chinese-journalist-dong-yuyu-human-rights

The detention of Dong has been criticised by international human rights and **press freedom** organisations.

He won a prestigious Nieman **fellowship** at Harvard University in 2006.

The Nieman Foundation has described Dong as a “**cherished** member” of the international Nieman community.

Dong’s **indictment** mentioned several senior Japanese diplomats who do not appear to have been expelled from China despite being involved with Dong’s alleged **espionage ring**.

“It’s pretty obvious there is no legal **argument** to uphold the verdict.”

His **incarceration** shows that China’s reform era is really over.”

In 2017, he was threatened with a **demotion** after a Chinese Communist party investigation deemed his writing “anti-socialist”.

Beh Lih Yi said Dong’s imprisonment “creates a **chilling** effect designed to stop or prevent any Chinese from speaking with foreigners.”

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/12/ukraine-war-briefing-top-bankers-straight-talk-to-putin-over-troubled-economy

His bank was experiencing only “very modest” growth due to “challenging macroeconomic conditions” including a **shrinkage** of its consumer loan **portfolio**. The Kremlin has **undertaken** an information campaign to portray the Russian economy as stable and strong.”

“Using its **numerical superiority** in personnel and materiel, the enemy advanced in fierce fighting and captured three settlements.”

These actions are part of a series of similar incidents and represent a **characteristic** of the war of aggression waged by Russia.”

“We are ready to discuss the suspicions,” Russia’s recently **reclusive** foreign minister told state media. “Other tests, both **subcritical**, or those without a **chain nuclear reaction**, and carrier tests, have never been prohibited,” Lavrov said.

The **knock-on** effects of the US sanctions on Russian oil companies have **upended** Russian investments in several countries.

The head of Ukraine’s delegation for talks with Russia said on Tuesday he was in Istanbul to try to “**unblock**” the process of prisoner swaps.

Ukraine’s prime minister said the government had dismissed Energoatom’s **supervisory board** while anti-corruption authorities said they had charged seven individuals over an alleged $100m **kickback** scheme involving the nuclear agency and other state enterprises.

The detainee has said he suffers from **pancreatitis** and **coeliac** disease and is **vegan**.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/13/mexico-sexual-abuse-president-groped

The shocking public groping of Mexico’s president has prompted rapid political action to tackle **sexual abuse**.

“We need to review who has **legislated** on issues related to the agenda of non-violence against women,” said Senator Martha Lucía Mícher, who added that the senate would be reviewing state **penal codes** on sexual abuse.

“You also conduct **awareness campaigns**.”

“What worries me is that the president’s focus is **exclusively** on criminal law and she is neglecting other avenues that could be strengthened.”

“What are we doing so that men have a **masculinity** that isn’t toxic, that isn’t violent, that isn’t invasive – so that they’re not **abusive**?”

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/13/amid-japans-surge-in-bear-attacks-a-torrent-of-ai-generated-videos-is-adding-to-anxiety

Headlines about real attacks and disruption appear on a **regular basis**.

Ussuri brown bears, commonly found on the northernmost main island of **Hokkaido**, as much as 400kg. And they can easily **outrun** humans.

The **sheer** number of clips could exacerbate fears that Japan is **in the grip of** an outbreak of **ursine** terror.

Several clips included details that added to their air of **authenticity**, such as references to locations where bear sightings have made the news.

Experts blame poor crops of **acorns** and **beechnuts**, which form the **bulk** of the animals’ diet, for the sudden surge in bear sighting.

The disruption to daily life in regions of northern Japan where the bear encounters are concentrated is **unmistakably** real.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/13/canada-arctic-spy-threats-russia-china

Canada’s domestic spy agency says Russia and China have a “significant intelligence interest” in Canada’s **Arctic**.

Dan Rogers flagged mounting concerns over hostile nations growing increasingly **emboldened** in the Arctic.

Canada has increasingly flagged the **troves** of critical minerals in the region as reason to increase investment in the north.

“we’ve had to **reprioritize** our operations to counter the actions of Iranian intelligence services,” Rogers said.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/15/china-advises-against-travel-to-japan-amid-escalating-row-over-pms-taiwan-comments

Sanae Takaichi told Japan’s parliament on 7 November that the use of force against the self-ruled island claimed by China could **warrant** a military response from Tokyo.

In the **since-removed** statement on social media, Xue posted about “(cutting) off that dirty neck”. Japan’s ruling party has since passed a resolution calling for the envoy to be declared **persona non grata**.

Takaichi, a conservative and China hawk, has toned down her rhetoric since **assuming office** last month.

If an emergency in Taiwan **entails** “**battleships** and the use of force, then that could constitute a situation threatening the survival of Japan, **any way you slice it**”, she said.

Despite the escalating diplomatic spat, Takaichi has since indicated she has no intention of **retracting** her statement.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/16/china-sends-coast-guard-to-senkaku-islands-amid-row-with-japan

China and Japan have repeatedly **faced off** around the islands.

Chinese military **transits** there are not rare.

China’s consul general in Osaka prompted a formal protest from Tokyo by commenting that “the dirty head that **sticks** itself out must be cut off”.

China’s defence ministry declared that any Japanese intervention would be **doomed to fail**.

Three Chinese airlines said on Saturday that tickets to Japan could be **refunded** or changed for free.

Late on Saturday, a Chinese state media editorial accused Takaichi of staging a **political stunt** that was “not just dangerously provocative but fundamentally **perverse**”.

“A conflict between Japan and China would not be a limited **skirmish**.”

However, China’s ruling Communist party says the unification of Taiwan with the People’s Republic of China is “inevitable”, and casts any opposition to it as **escalatory**.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/16/ukraine-war-briefing-drones-hit-russias-ryazan-oil-refinery

Russian officials often do not admit such attacks have succeeded, and the Ryazan governor, Pavel Malkov, **adopted the standard line** that Ukrainian drones were shot down but debris happened to hit the target.

The Serbian state holds nearly 30% of NIS, with the rest owned by minority **shareholders**.

Moscow seeks to **scupper** one of Kyiv’s key logistical systems. The rail network carries more than 63% of the country’s freight – including **grain** shipments – and 37% of passenger traffic.

Volodymyr Zelenskyy has announced an **overhaul** of state-owned energy companies amid a corruption scandal. Anti-**graft** investigators allege around $100m has been **embezzled**.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/17/china-travel-warning-for-japan-sends-shares-in-tourism-and-retail-companies-plunging

The comments triggered a furious response from Beijing, including a coastguard **sail-by** through the disputed Senkaku islands at the weekend.

In morning trade on Monday, shares in the Japanese **cosmetics** firm Shiseido fell 9%.

Japan’s **self-imposed** rules say that it can act militarily only under certain conditions.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/17/china-and-japan-are-in-a-war-of-words-over-taiwan-what-happens-next

The quarrel **kicked off** after Japan’s prime minister, Sanae Takaichi, suggested Japan could become militarily involved in a conflict between China and Taiwan.

“The so-called Taiwan contingency has become so serious that we have to anticipate a **worst-case** scenario,” Takaichi said.

Takaichi **hails from** the right of the ruling Liberal Democratic party (LDP) and shares hawkish views on China once **espoused** by Shinzo Abe.

On Monday, China’s embassy in Japan posted on its social media a reminder that it had not **renounced** using force to take Taiwan.

In the **immediate term**, the row is more likely to have an impact on bilateral economic and people-to-people ties between the key trading partners.

“I also urge China to exercise restraint and demonstrate the conduct **befitting** a major power, rather than becoming a troublemaker for regional peace and stability,” Lai said.

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/nov/17/manila-philippines-corruption-protest-flood-funds

From a **skyscraper** in downtown Manila, a sea of white spreads out below, expanding down **arterial** roads and **sidestreets**. The slogan “transparency for a better democracy” **emblazoned** on their chests.

Billions of dollars in flood mitigation funds have **evaporated**. Organised by the Iglesia ni Cristo (INC), a powerful **sect** in the Philippines, the three-day rally has shut down schools, roads and offices. Families have journeyed from across the country to set up camp, some equipped with **portable** stoves and rice cookers, many of them **bearing placards** saying “expose the **deeds**”.

The focus of the fury is on government officials accused of **pocketing** billions in funds for substandard or nonexistent flood protection projects. Since the scandal began, the country’s economic planning minister has said up to 70% of public funds **allotted** for flood control may have been lost to corruption.

The absence of those protections is **felt keenly** in the Philippines.

But the hundreds of thousands gathered in Rizal Park could **spell trouble** for Marcos. The rally has been organised and endorsed by the INC, a Philippine **megachurch** that commands a membership of close to 3 million.

In the years since their election, however, Marcos and Duterte have turned from allies to **feuding** political rivals.

“It is not our aim to bring down the government as an **institution**,” he said.
