---
layout: post
title:  "25年3月新闻摘选"
date:   2025-03-17 20:26:00 +0800
---

* 目录
{:toc #markdown-toc}

#### [2025-03-16 US says airstrikes against Houthis in Yemen will continue indefinitely](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/mar/16/us-says-airstrikes-against-houthis-in-yemen-will-continue-indefinitely)

US officials have said airstrikes launched against Yemen’s Iran-backed Houthis will continue **indefinitely**, after a first round on Saturday killed at least 53 people and injured almost 100 more.

```
This morning, our teacher told us the exam had beenput off indefinitely.
```

The strikes, which aim to punish the Houthis for their attacks against Red Sea shipping, are Donald Trump’s first such use of US **military might** in the region since he took power in January.

```
After decades of hard work, China's military might has made remarkable progress.
```

Pete Hegseth, the US defence secretary, told Fox News: “The minute the Houthis say ‘we’ll stop shooting at your ships, we’ll stop shooting at your drones’, this campaign will end, but until then it will be **unrelenting**.”

```
Despite the agreement on a 30-day ceasefire, Russia's unrelenting drone attacks on Kyiv continue.
```

Hegseth was among several senior officials underlining that the strikes were **designed to** signal a new assertive approach to Iran, and more generally in the Middle East.

```
The experiments presented in class are designed to help students better understand.
```

Michael Waltz, the US national security adviser, said in separate interviews that the strikes “targeted multiple Houthi leaders and **took them out**” and had involved “overwhelming force [that] put Iran on notice that **enough is enough**”.

```
Uprisings throughout the country were aimed at taking the tyrant out.
```

```
After all that has happened, everyone realized that enough is enough.
```

Video posted by social media users suggested Trump had earlier in the day been at his Mar-a-Lago **resort** in Palm Beach and at the nearby Trump International golf club.

```
We had a good time at the resort last week.
```

In a statement shared by state media, Iran’s foreign ministry condemned the strikes on Yemen as a “**gross** violation of the principles of the United Nations charter and the fundamental rules of international law”.

```
What this man did was a gross violation of the law.
```

The Iranian foreign minister, Abbas Araghchi, said the US government had “no authority, or business, **dictating** Iranian foreign policy”.

```
You have no right to dictate to me what to do.
```

“The explosions were **violent** and shook the neighbourhood like an earthquake. They terrified our women and children,” said one resident, who gave his name as Abdullah Yahia.

```
The thunder was so violent that it was heard by people throughout the city.
```

A **crane** and bulldozer were used to remove debris at one site in the city and people used their bare hands to pick through the rubble. At a hospital, medics treated the injured, including children, and the bodies of several **casualties** were placed in a yard, wrapped in plastic sheets, Reuters footage showed.

```
Several cranes have been mobilised to the rescue scene.
```

```
Not all of the casualties have been transferred out of the field.
```

The UN secretary general, António Guterres, on Sunday called for “utmost restraint and a **cessation** of all military activities” in Yemen.

```
Among all sides, the cessation of violence is a consensus.
```

On Tuesday, the Houthis said they would resume attacks on Israeli ships passing through the Red Sea and Arabian Sea, the **Bab al-Mandab** strait and the **Gulf of Aden**, ending a period of relative calm starting in January with the Gaza ceasefire.

```
The Bab al-Mandab Strait has an important strategic significance, which links the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden.
```

#### [2025-03-17 Donald Trump: Iran will be held responsible for Houthi attacks](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/mar/17/donald-trump-iran-will-be-held-responsible-for-houthi-attacks)

“Every **shot** fired by the Houthis will be **looked upon**, from this point forward, as being a shot fired from the weapons and leadership of IRAN, and IRAN will be **held responsible**, and suffer the consequences, and those consequences will be **dire**!” Trump posted on his Truth Social platform on Monday.

```
We have only 5 shots left.
```

```
He should be looked upon in the same way as the others.
```

```
Anyone who breaks the law will be held responsible.
```

```
What she faces is such a dire situation.
```

Trump’s comments further escalate his administration’s new **campaign** targeting the rebels. Airstrikes killed at least 53 people this weekend and appear **poised** to continue. Meanwhile, Iran continues to **weigh** how to respond to a letter Trump sent it last week trying to **jump-start** negotiations over Tehran’s rapidly **advancing** nuclear programme.

```
All of the soldiers were brave in the campaign.
```

```
He is poised to take the exam.
```

```
You should weigh how to gather so much money in just 3 days.
```

```
Due to its advancing industrial policies, China has achieved significant growth in the auto sector.  
```

Describing the Houthis as “sinister **mobsters** and **thugs**”, Trump warned any attack by the group would be met with “great force, and there is no guarantee that that force will stop there”.

```
Mobsters and thugs have severely undermined the safety and security of the community.
```

“Iran has played ‘the innocent victim’ of **rogue** terrorists from which they’ve lost control, but they haven’t lost control,” Trump alleged in his post. 

```
This room will not tolerate rogue behavior.
```

It is unclear what sparked Trump’s post. However, the head of Iran’s **paramilitary** Revolutionary Guards sought to separate the Houthis’ actions from those of Tehran this weekend.

```
Both their equipment and fighting spirit are of a paramilitary nature.
```

#### [2025-03-18 Vladimir Putin agrees to 30-day halt to attacks on Ukraine’s energy grid](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/mar/18/trump-and-putin-to-hold-high-stakes-call-on-ukraine)

Vladimir Putin has agreed to a limited ceasefire that would stop Russia targeting Ukraine’s energy infrastructure after a **high-stakes** phone call with Donald Trump.

```
Investing in A-Shares can be considered a form of high-stakes gambling.
```

But the Russian leader declined to commit to a 30-day full ceasefire, a plan pitched by Trump that Ukraine agreed to last week, **denting** the US president’s hope of bringing a quick end to hostilities.

```
What he has done has dented my expectations for the celebration.
```

Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, speaking after the call, said Ukraine was **favourable** to the idea of both sides halting attacks on each other’s infrastructure but he was waiting for “details” of what had been agreed first.

```
Everyone is favourable to his achievements.
```

Trump put a positive **spin** on the discussion, writing on his Truth Social platform shortly after the call ended that he had had a “very good and **productive**” conversation with Putin.

```
The government mouthpiece put a rare positive spin on the event.
```

```
The meeting held in Beijing last month was quite productive.
```

“We agreed to an immediate Ceasefire on all Energy and Infrastructure, with an **understanding** that we will be working quickly to have a Complete Ceasefire and, ultimately, an END to this very horrible War between Russia and Ukraine,” he added.

```
They have come to an undertanding on the refugees.
```

If **upheld** by both sides, a halt to attacks on energy infrastructure would mark the first **partial** ceasefire in more than three years since Russia launched its full-scale invasion of Ukraine in February 2022.

```
The relationship should be upheld by both of us.
```

```
Partial ceasefire is acceptable.
```

In his first public appearance since the call, Trump told Fox News interviewer Laura Ingraham: “Right now you have a lot of guns pointing at each other and a ceasefire without going a little bit further would have been **tough**. Russia has the advantage. As you know, they have encircled about 2,500 soldiers. They are nicely encircled and that’s not good. And we want to **get it over with**.”

```
The tough experiences make him stronger.
```

```
Let's get it over with.
```

During the interview Trump described himself as a “**nationalist**” who has “very good” relationships with Putin, Chinese president Xi Jinping and North Korea’s Kim Jong-un.

```
As a notionalist, he can't tolerate any words criticising his motherland.
```

That process is now in full force and effect, and we will, hopefully, for the sake of **Humanity**, get the job done!”

```
What we have done is simply out of humanity.
```

During the call with Trump, which lasted two and a half hours, Putin reiterated his concerns over **a range of** issues that he said must be addressed before a more wide-ranging ceasefire could be implemented, according to the Kremlin statement.

```
A range of achievements has been showcased at the exhibition.
```

The “series of significant issues” included how such a ceasefire would be **enforced** and whether it would give Ukraine an opportunity to strengthen its forces and receive western military aid, it said.

“It was emphasised that a key condition for preventing the escalation of the conflict and working toward its resolution through political and diplomatic means must be the complete cessation of foreign military aid and the **provision** of intelligence to Kyiv,” the Kremlin said.

```
Thanks for your provision of these books.
```

There was no indication that Putin had abandoned any of his most hardline objectives in the war in Ukraine. He told Trump that peace talks must “take into account the unconditional **necessity** to remove the initial reasons for the crisis and Russia’s legal security interests”.

```
Necessities of daily life have been promptly mobilised to the earthquake's epicenter.
```

Europe would be uneasy about a suspension of all weapons deliveries to Ukraine as the UK and EU are **stepping up efforts** to deliver fresh military aid packages to Kyiv as soon as possible.

```
We should join hands to step up efforts to achieve the Chinese Dream.
```

At a news conference in Berlin with the French president, Emmanuel Macron, Olaf Scholz, the **outgoing** German chancellor, called an end to Russian attacks on Ukraine’s energy infrastructure “a good start” but stressed that “there cannot be an agreement without Ukraine”.

```
An outgoing offical will gain less favor.
```

Before the call, Trump said Russian and American negotiators had already talked about “**dividing up** certain **assets**”.

```
His sons have already divided up this assets.
```

Washington is also reportedly discussing the possibility of putting pressure on the UN to **follow suit**, it said.

```
I'm so glad that you decided to follow suit.
```

“It is **official** now – a PERFECT call,” Kirill Dmitriev, a senior aide close to Putin, wrote on X.

```
As the official explantations always avoided certain issues, a trust crisis has formed.
```

#### [2025-03-19 Trump and Zelenskyy share ‘frank’ but ‘very good’ call as Ukraine accepts partial ceasefire](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/mar/19/trump-has-very-good-phone-call-with-zelenskyy-who-signs-on-to-partial-ceasefire)

Donald Trump and Volodymyr Zelenskyy had a “very good telephone call” on Wednesday, according to Trump, in the first conversation between the US president and his Ukrainian counterpart since their disastrous **showdown** in the White House three weeks ago.

```
Showdown means you don't have chance any more.
```

Zelenskyy described the call as “positive, very **substantive** and frank”, and said he had signed up to a partial ceasefire that Trump agreed with Vladimir Putin a day earlier. The White House said Trump had promised to help with a Ukrainian request to source more air defence **batteries** for Kyiv.

```
The conversation made no progress, and deliberately, many subsetantive issues have been ignored.
```

```
Several air defence batteries have been introduced to tackle drone attacks.
```

The last encounter between Trump and Zelenskyy ended in an angry **exchange of words** between the two presidents and the US vice-president, JD Vance. It marked a low point in US-Ukrainian relations and **spooked** other allies that Washington may be about to abandon Kyiv.

```
It's no use engaging in an exchange of words.
```

```
The steep increase of interest rate spooks investment market.
```

We are very much on track,” he wrote, in language that was noticeably less **hyperbolic** than some of his **pronouncements** on the conflict.

```
His pronouncements are so hyperbolic that nobody believes.
```

Ukrainian officials say that they believe their relations with the Trump administration are now on **sounder** **footing**.

```
We will retreat to winterfall and get a sounder footing.
```

“It was a **fairly** **emotional** conversation in the Oval Office, and it showed that **contradictions** had built up,” said Zelenskyy’s aide Mykhailo Podolyak, in an interview in Kyiv earlier on Wednesday.

```
His speech was fairly emotional.
```

```
Contradictions exist in all societies.
```

On Wednesday, Trump’s negotiating envoy Steve Witkoff described the call between Trump and Putin as “two great leaders coming together for the **betterment** of mankind”.

```
Each piece of work we did was committed to the betterment of people's lives.
```

“They believe that this softer rhetoric, many personal connections, will enable them to find a level of trust. Although when I put the words ‘trust’ and ‘Russia’ together, it looks **fantastical** to me,” he said.

```
I had a fantastical dream last night.
```

Trump, in an initial post on Truth Social, said the partial ceasefire would apply to “energy and infrastructure”, giving the impression that it would extend to all **civilian infrastructure**.

```
All civilian infrastructure needs to be maintained periodically.
```

However, Peskov directly **contradicted** Trump, when speaking to reporters in Moscow: “The need to halt arms supplies to Kyiv was discussed during Putin and Trump’s conversation,” he said.

```
The congress contradicted the proposal, which ignited people's rage.
```

#### [2025-03-20 EU ready to impose more sanctions on Russia after summit talks](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/mar/20/eu-ready-to-impose-more-sanctions-on-russia-after-summit-talks)

EU leaders – apart from Hungary’s Viktor Orbán – say they are ready to increase pressure on Russia through further sanctions, as summit talks exposed a **geographical** divide on rearming Europe.

```
India has been embroiled in geographical conflicts with neighboring countries in recent years.
```

Meeting in Brussels, the bloc agreed it was ready to **levy** further sanctions on Russia and strengthen existing measures after talks with Ukraine’s Volodymyr Zelenskyy, who joined by video link.

```
The tariffs levyed by Trump has been proven to have very limited effects on China.
```

The show of unity was **marred** by Orbán refusing to support an EU text declaring support for Ukraine, which stated: “The European Council calls on Russia to show real political will to end the war.” 

```
The peaceful atmosphere of the summit was marred by Trump's exaggerated pronouncements.
```

Orbán’s growing confidence in diverging from the EU on Ukraine raises questions about the bloc’s ability to impose new sanctions and renew existing ones, although diplomats take **comfort** from the fact Hungary has always **acceded** to the plans in the end.

```
Participants at the summit take comfort from China's unwavering stance against the US President's isolationism.
```

```
After a longstanding negotiation, Japan had acceded to raising the exchange rate.
```

**Separately** the Financial Times reported that Europe’s biggest military powers are discussing how to take on greater responsibility for Europe’s defence. Countries including the UK, France and Germany aim to present Donald Trump with a plan to shift the financial and military **burden** to European capitals, in the hope of a managed transfer over five to 10 years, the paper reported.

```
Now that the children didn't want to eat the same food, their mother had to cook for each of them separately.
```

```
The birth of the second child brings additional economic burdens to this family.
```

These are billions and billions of **euros** that we will spend and we want a return on investment,” she said. “And where they are spent, they will produce good jobs.”

```
This cup costs me 5 euros.
```

There have been differences and disagreements before but we have been able to overcome them by realising we are all safer when we stand together,” he said, speaking from Copenhagen shortly before Zelenskyy **touched down** in Norway on Thursday.

```
The Ukrainian President had no sooner touched down in Washington than he arrived at the White House.
```

Despite an EU agreement to “urgently step up efforts” to aid Ukraine’s defence, a €40bn (£33bn) EU military aid plan has **fizzled** out after it failed to win support from larger member states, including France, Spain and Italy. Kaja Kallas, the EU’s foreign policy head, who led the initiative, is now calling on member states to provide 2m shells worth €5bn, a downgrade on her original plan that **envisaged** every country contributing military aid based on the size of its economy.

```
His expectation of becoming rich has fizzled out.
```

```
It was very dangerous to envisage that war will never happen.
```

Kallas **acknowledged** the plan had not won universal support: “For every country it is the domestic politics, also the understanding of the public of what needs to be done and that is different in every member state.”

```
He refuses to acknowledge his failure.
```

Spain and Italy, which both spend below the 2% Nato target on defence, say Europe cannot **overlook** other threats to security. Spain is urging a wider definition of defence spending to **encompass** cybersecurity, anti-terrorism and efforts to combat the climate crisis.

```
We cannot overlook what the Russians have done to Ukraine.
```

```
The economic stimulus plan encompasses several finacial and monetary measures.
```

It was important, he said, “to take into account that the challenges that we face in the southern neighbourhood are a bit different to the ones the eastern **flank** face”.

```
We achieved a great victory in the east, but gained suffered losses at the west flank.
```

Earlier this month the commission outlined an €800bn plan that included a €150bn loans package and flexibility on EU **fiscal** rules that would allow countries to take on €650bn in additional debt. EU leaders have endorsed the big picture, but some countries are **reluctant** to deepen their debts and are seeking EU grants.

```
The investment market has been eager for looser fiscal policies for a long time.
```

```
I don't want you to accept this reluctantly.
```

#### [2025-03-23 Gulf in US and Russian expectations marks start of latest ceasefire talks](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/mar/23/gulf-in-us-and-russian-expectations-marks-start-of-latest-ceasefire-talks)

US and Ukrainian officials have met for further talks aimed at **hammering out** a ceasefire in Russia’s war in Ukraine, with Washington signalling its hope for “real progress” even as Moscow warned that “difficult negotiations” lie ahead.

```
They hammered out a plan before the deadline.
```

The **gulf** in expectations marked the start of the latest round of negotiations in Saudi Arabia, which was set to follow with a meeting between American officials and Russia on Monday. The US is pushing for a broad ceasefire in Russia’s war in Ukraine by 20 April, according to Bloomberg, though sources said the timeline may **slip** given the wide **gap** that exists between Kyiv and Moscow’s positions.

```
The gulf in ideology intensified their conflicts.
```

```
The timeline may slip according to the progress of each node.
```

```
Their gap has been widened further as she saw his behavior as a betrayal.
```

This week’s talks are expected to **delve** into the details of implementing the 30-day ceasefire on energy infrastructure, and potentially expand into shipping in the Black Sea.

```
The talking was very productive, they delved into many deep issues.
```

“I think you’re going to see in Saudi Arabia on Monday some real progress, particularly as it affects a Black Sea ceasefire on ships between both countries,” said Witkoff. “And from that you’ll naturally **gravitate** to a **full-on** shooting ceasefire.”

```
Countries in the area are seriously worried about the conflicts, which are gravitating towards a full-on war.
```

Peskov said the “main” focus in its talks with the US would be a possible **resumption** of a 2022 Black Sea grain deal, brokered by Turkey and the UN, that ensured safe navigation for Ukrainian farm exports via the Black Sea.

```
The resumption of activities in every aspect is significantly boosting people's confidence.
```

Moscow **pulled out of** the deal in 2023, amid accusations that the west had failed to uphold its commitments to ease sanctions on Russia’s exports of farm produce and **fertilisers**.

```
The U.S. has pulled out of the Paris Climate Agreement again, due to the prevalence of climate denialism.
```

```
To ensure that vegetables grow vigorously, the use of fertilizers is very important.
```

Speaking to Fox News on Sunday, Witkoff, a real **estate** developer who had no prior diplomatic experience before being tasked as Donald Trump’s special envoy, downplayed fears of Vladimir Putin launching a broader aggression.

```
Since he lost his ancestors' estate at the gambling table, he feels too ashamed to return home.
```

The agenda is, stop the killing, stop the **carnage**. Let’s end this thing.

```
Carnages are unavoidable in war.
```

This week’s talks **come on the heels of** a wide-ranging interview with the former Fox News host, Tucker Carlson, in which Witkoff detailed his **admiration** for Putin, who launched the full-scale invasion of Ukraine three years ago, and **scorned** the UK’s prime minister.

```
Stars come on the heels of sunset.
```

```
She didn't hide her admiration for him at all.
```

```
Don't be so mean, the person you scorned is very embarrassed.
```

He dismissed Keir Starmer’s readiness to put British troops on the ground in Ukraine post-ceasefire as “a combination of a **posture** and a pose”.

```
He deliberately adopts a tough posture to gain an advantage over his rival in the negotiation.
```

Witkoff, who is leading the US ceasefire negotiations with both Russia and Ukraine, described Starmer’s idea as “**simplistic**” adding: “I think there’s this, you know, this sort of notion of we’ve all got to be like Winston Churchill, the Russians are gonna march across Europe. I think that’s **preposterous**. By the way, we have something called Nato that we did not have in World War II.”

```
I don't think they'll be successful; they always think of things too simplistically.
```

```
I must point out that your plan is preposterous.
```

Ukraine’s constitution bars national elections from being held during a period of martial law, while, logistically speaking, any **outcome** risks being marred by disruptions from air raids, potential attacks on crowded polling stations and the Russian occupation of some regions.

```

```

When asked about the upcoming talks, however, Witkoff said the “central issue” was the Ukrainian regions that had been annexed or partially occupied by Russian forces. He **stumbled**, however, in trying to name them.

```

```

Earlier this month, Volodymyr Zelenskyy stressed that Ukraine would not recognise any occupied territories – where Russia was accused of holding **sham** polls in 2022 in a bid to provide **cover** for their illegal annexation – as Russian.

```

```

```

```

Witkoff appeared to side with the Kremlin as he cited the largely discredited polls as evidence of local sentiment on the ground and **conflated** the locally spoken language with support for Russia.

```

```

“They’re Russian-speaking,” Witkoff said of the four eastern regions. “There have been **referendums** where the overwhelming majority of the people have indicated that they want to be under Russian rule.”

```

```

Witkoff, who met Putin earlier this month in Moscow, told Carlson that the meeting “got personal”, as Putin had commissioned “a beautiful **portrait**” of Trump from a “leading Russian artist” for Witkoff to take home to the US president.

```

```

He went to his local church and met with his **priest** and prayed for the president.

```

```

His comments were swiftly slammed by the journalist and **historian** Anne Applebaum. 

```

```

“Who doesn’t want to have a world where Russia and the United States are doing, **collaboratively**, good things together?” he asked.

```

```

#### [2025-03-24 Ukraine accuses Moscow of ‘hollow statements about peace’ after latest attack](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/mar/24/ukraine-accuses-moscow-of-hollow-statements-about-peace-after-latest-attack)

Ukraine has accused Moscow of making “**hollow** statements about peace” after 88 people were injured in a Russian missile attack as US and Russian officials began talks that Washington hopes will mark the first step toward lasting peace.

Seventeen children were among the casualties after the missile hit schools and residential buildings in the city of Sumy, Ukrainian officials said late on Monday, as Moscow appeared to be exploiting the window before any ceasefire to launch attacks on Ukraine.

“Every day like this, all the nights with Russian missiles and drones against our country, every day of the war means losses, pain and destruction that Ukraine never wanted,” Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, said in his nightly video address.

Ukraine’s foreign minister, Andrii Sybiha, said: “Instead of making hollow statements about peace, Russia must stop bombing our cities and end its war on civilians.”

Shortly after Zelenskyy’s comments, Russian media reported that US and Russian officials had ended 12 hours of talks in Saudi Arabia as Donald Trump pushes to broker a limited ceasefire.

Russian media reported that a draft joint statement had been sent to Moscow and Washington for approval, with the parties **aiming to** release it on Tuesday.

Ukraine and Russia have agreed in principle to a one-month halt on strikes on energy infrastructure after Trump spoke with the countries’ leaders last week. But uncertainty remains over how and when the partial ceasefire would take effect – and whether its scope would extend beyond energy infrastructure to include other critical sites, such as hospitals, bridges and **vital** **utilities**.

US officials held initial talks with Ukraine on Sunday evening and negotiated separately with Russia on Monday, with most meetings taking place at the Ritz-Carlton hotel in **Riyadh**.

The US is expected to **shuttle** between the two countries to **finalise** details and negotiate separate measures to ensure the safety of shipping in the Black Sea. “The ultimate goal is a 30-day ceasefire, during which time we discuss a permanent ceasefire. We’re not far away from that,” said the US special envoy Steve Witkoff in a podcast with the far-right commentator Tucker Carlson over the weekend.

As the Russia-US talks began in Riyadh, Trump said he expected Washington and Kyiv to sign a **revenue-sharing** agreement on Ukrainian critical minerals soon.

Trump also told reporters the US was talking to Ukraine about the potential for its firms to own Ukrainian power plants.

Speaking to reporters in Washington, Trump listed issues he said were on the table: “We’re talking about territory right now. We’re talking about lines of **demarcation**, talking about power, power-plant ownership.”

Ukrainian officials have backed the signing of a minerals deal, but Zelenskyy has publicly rejected the idea of US firms owning Ukrainian power plants.

The **lead-up** to the talks was marked by a series of pro-Russian statements by Witkoff – **tapped** by Trump as his personal envoy to Putin – in which he appeared to **legitimise** Russia’s staged referendums in four Ukrainian regions.

Speaking with Carlson, Witkoff claimed that in the four regions where Moscow held widely condemned referendums on joining Russia, “the overwhelming majority of the people have indicated that they want to be under Russian rule”.

The referendums in Luhansk, Donetsk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia provinces were widely rebuked in the west as illegitimate and are viewed as a **thinly** **veiled** attempt to justify Russia’s illegal annexation of the regions. Their annexation marked the largest **forcible** **seizure** of territory in Europe since the second world war.

In the interview with Carlson, Witkoff also claimed Putin had **commissioned** a portrait of Trump “by a **leading** Russian painter” that the envoy had brought back with him after a trip to Moscow.

Witkoff went on to say that after the assassination attempt on Trump last July, Putin told him that he visited his local church, met his priest and prayed for Trump. “Not because he was the president of the United States or could become the president of the United States, but because he had a friendship with him and he was praying for his friend,” Witkoff said.

“I don’t regard Putin as a bad guy. That is a complicated situation, that war and all the **ingredients** that **led up to** it,” he added.

Witkoff’s willingness to echo Kremlin talking points and his praise for Putin are likely to heighten anxiety in Ukraine and across European capitals.

In an interview with Time magazine published on Monday but **conducted** before Witkoff’s remarks, Zelenskyy said some US officials had begun to take Putin at his word even when it contradicted their own intelligence.

“I believe Russia has managed to influence some people on the White House team through information,” he said. “Their signal to the Americans was that the Ukrainians do not want to end the war, and something should be done to force them.”

Moscow and Kyiv remain far apart on what would be acceptable terms for a peace treaty, with no sign that Putin has **relinquished** any of his maximalist aims in the war against Ukraine.

Moscow has set out several maximalist conditions for any long-term settlement – most of which are non-starters for Kyiv and its European allies. These include a halt to all foreign military aid and intelligence sharing with Ukraine, restrictions on the size of its armed forces, and international recognition of the four Ukrainian regions Russia illegally annexed following staged referendums in 2022.

The Kremlin has also signalled it would reject any presence of western troops in Ukraine – something Kyiv views as essential to securing lasting security guarantees.

Ukraine remains deeply sceptical of any Russian agreement, pointing to past **instances** where Moscow failed to **honour** its commitments.

#### [2025-03-26 Republican senators break ranks to call for investigation of Signal leak scandal](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2025/mar/26/signal-investigation-republican-senators)

**In rare signs of unrest**, top Republican senators are calling for an investigation into the Signal leak scandal and demanding answers from the Trump administration, as they raise concerns it will become a “significant political problem” if not addressed properly.

“This is what happens when you don’t really have your **act together**,” the Alaska Republican senator Lisa Murkowski told the Hill.

The Trump administration has been facing criticism from Democrats – and now Republicans – after Monday’s embarrassing **revelation** that a team of senior national security officials accidentally added a journalist to a private group chat on Signal, an encrypted messaging app. The group, which included JD Vance, the defense secretary, Pete Hegseth, the secretary of state, Marco Rubio, and others, discussed sensitive plans to engage in military strikes on Houthi targets in Yemen.

On Wednesday, morning the Atlantic posted another **tranche** of messages that contained details of the attack on Yemen, including descriptions of targets, launch times and even the details of weather during the assault.

Senior national security officials testified before the Senate intelligence **committee** on Tuesday, where the national intelligence director, Tulsi Gabbard, and CIA director, John Ratcliffe, were **grilled** by lawmakers over the scandal. The national security officials said “no **classified** material” had been shared in the chat. Republicans are now calling for investigations, as well.

According to reporting from the Hill, top Republican senators are calling for various committees to investigate the leak, including the Senate armed services committee and the Senate intelligence committee. The Mississippi senator Roger Wicker, who **chairs** the armed services committee, told the Hill he would be asking the defense department’s inspector general to investigate the scandal.

The national security adviser, Mike Waltz, who reportedly added Jeffrey Goldberg, editor in chief of the Atlantic, to the group chat, took “full responsibility” for the leak on a Tuesday night Fox News appearance. However, he did not describe how the leak happened and **trashed** Goldberg, calling him “the bottom-**scum** of journalists”. During his television appearance, Waltz said he started the Signal group chat but **unknowingly** added a contact that **happened to** have Goldberg’s number.

“Of course I didn’t see this loser in the group, it looked like someone else,” he said.

Tensions are rising among Republicans, with the two wings of the party divided on what should happen with Waltz, according to reporting from Politico.

On the one hand, traditional, hawkish Republicans see Waltz as a strong vehicle to push Trump officials towards a more aggressive foreign policy, and advocate for him to stay in the administration. On the other hand, Trumpian Republicans like Vance oppose the hawkish approach to foreign policy. Waltz’s position, for now, seems to be safe, with Donald Trump calling Waltz a “very good man”.

Despite the prospect of congressional investigations, there are still significant questions left unanswered about the leak, with Waltz and Trump contradicting each other in separate interviews. Waltz on Tuesday said that a **staffer** had been not responsible for the leak.

“Look, I take full responsibility, I built the group,” Waltz said. But Trump suggested the opposite during an interview.

“What it was, we believe, is somebody that was on the line with permission, somebody that worked with Mike Waltz at a lower level, had Goldberg’s number or call through the app, and somehow this guy ended up on the call,” Trump said. His statements were unclear, since the Atlantic journalist had been added to a text chat, not a phone call.

The use of Signal for internal government discussions has also been called into question. A non-profit organization, American Oversight, **sued** members of the Trump administration on Tuesday afternoon, saying the app’s use violated the Federal Records Act. The organization is requesting that a federal court order the officials to preserve the messages “to prevent the unlawful destruction of federal records”.

Trump said on Wednesday afternoon during wide-ranging remarks at the White House as he announced new tariffs, about the Signal group chat scandal: “I think it’s all a **witch-hunt**.” He added that Signal could be a “**defective**” platform and said it was “not very good”.

The secretary of state Marco Rubio also weighed in while on a visit to Jamaica.

Talking to reporters in Kingston, he said of the chat group: “Someone made a big mistake and added a journalist.”

#### [2025-03-26 Russian strikes show Moscow does not want ‘real peace’, says Zelenskyy](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2025/mar/26/russian-ukraine-drone-strikes-zelenskyy-peace)

Ukraine’s president has accused Russia of being **insincere** about making peace as he reported an attack by 117 drones, before he headed to Paris for a discussion with EU and Nato leaders about establishing a post-conflict security force.

Volodymyr Zelenskyy said that launching **nationwide** strikes after negotiations over maritime and energy ceasefires was proof of Russia’s true intentions, though the Kremlin insisted the US-brokered talks were proceeding constructively.

Four people were reported killed and six injured across Ukraine by regional governors overnight, while the country’s air force said it shot down 56 of the 117 incoming drones and another 48 were **decoys** that caused no damage.

“Last night, there were another 117 proofs in our skies of how Russia continues to **drag out** this war,” Zelenskyy posted on X. “Launching such large-scale attacks after ceasefire negotiations is a clear signal to the whole world that Moscow is not going to pursue real peace.”

Russia’s defence ministry countered by saying that Ukraine had sought to strike Russian energy facilities overnight, targeting a gas storage site in occupied Crimea and electricity transmission in the border region of Bryansk.

“Thus, the Kyiv regime, while continuing to damage the Russian civilian energy infrastructure, is actually doing everything it can to thwart the agreements reached” by negotiators from Russia and the US, the Russian ministry said, though it was not immediately possible to verify the claims.

Parallel talks between Russia and the US and the US and Ukraine in Saudi Arabia this week had reached agreement on implementing a ceasefire in the Black Sea and a 30-day halt to strikes on energy targets already agreed to **in principle** by the Ukrainian and Russian leaders.

But the Kremlin emphasised that its agreement to a ceasefire was conditional on the US helping ease access to its exports of food and fertiliser, and the reconnection of state agricultural bank Rosselkhozbank to the Swift payments system. The US said it was studying the Russian request.

At a briefing on Wednesday, Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin spokesperson, praised the talks. “We are satisfied with how pragmatically and constructively our dialogue is developing and by how it is **yielding** results,” he said.

A list of Russian and Ukrainian targets to be covered by the energy **moratorium** had been agreed with the help of US negotiators, Peskov added, a point that had been announced by Zelenskyy the day before. Ukraine’s leader said the energy ceasefire should be ready to **come into force** from today.

Zelenskyy is scheduled to meet the French president, Emmanuel Macron, in Paris and attend a meeting of political and military delegations from 31 countries led by France and the UK, represented by the prime minister, Keir Starmer. Together they are trying to **stitch** together a “**reassurance** force” to provide security to Ukraine in the event of a negotiated **armistice** or peace.

Details about who will participate and the size of the force have been **sparse** with speculation that it could contain 10,000 to 30,000 troops plus fighter jet **policing** to secure Ukraine’s air space, as well as maritime patrols **de-mining** the Black Sea to protect grain exports.

European sources have stressed that the force would not police or be based closed to the current front lines, but the deputy head of Ukraine’s presidential office, Ihor Zhovkva, said the reassurance force had to be strong enough to **fend** off any Russian aggression, if necessary.

Though Zhovka said Kyiv had to “first and foremost” rely on its own military, members of any reassurance force had to show a “readiness to fight” and “to be ready to be engaged in the real combat” and recognise that defending Ukraine was “an inevitable part of European security”.

Donald Trump has been pressing for a full end to the fighting in Ukraine, declaring on the campaign trail before his election that he could end the war in 24 hours, though earlier this month he described his own statement as “a little bit **sarcastic**”.

So far the parallel negotiations that took place in the Saudi capital, Riyadh, have brought relatively modest results – and raised questions over whether a full ceasefire is possible given the lack of trust between Moscow and Kyiv and ongoing fighting.

Overnight, the US president even questioned whether Putin was committed to a peace deal at this stage. “I think that Russia wants to see an end to it, but it could be they’re **dragging their feet**,” Trump said in a TV interview.

“I’ve done it over the years, you know; I don’t want to sign a contract, I want to sort of stay in the game, but maybe I don’t want to do it, quite … I’m not sure. But no, I think Russia would like to see it end, and I think Zelenskyy would like to see it end at this point,” he told Newsmax.

Ukraine’s strategy is to engage constructively in the talks, showing it is ready to agree to intermediate ceasefire proposals, and switch the **onus** on peace to Russia in the belief the Kremlin will raise more pre-conditions.

Moscow, however, appears focused on what it can obtain from the US, with Trump acknowledging the US had had discussions about a division of Ukrainian territory with the Kremlin. No such negotiations had been had with Ukraine, Zelenskyy said on Tuesday.

On Wednesday evening, during a panel interview in Paris with journalists from across Europe, Zelenskyy said he was “very grateful” for bipartisan support from the US, but he feared some were “under the influence of Russian narratives”. “We can’t agree to those narratives,” he added.