---
layout: post
title:  "26年3月新闻摘选"
date:   2026-03-04 14:00:00 +0800
---

<style type="text/css">
  pre code {
    white-space: pre-wrap;
    word-wrap: break-word;
    overflow-wrap: break-word;
  }
</style>

* 目录
{:toc #markdown-toc}

### China

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2026/mar/03/china-two-sessions-president-xi-economy-defence-technology

The **standing** committee of China’s top political advisory body has voted to remove three generals from its ranks as a sweeping purge of the military continues before this week’s annual Two Sessions gathering.

```
standing ~ 常设的 -> 一直站在那的
```

**Collectively** the concurrent meetings are referred to as Two Sessions, one of the most important events in China’s political calendar when thousands of delegates arrive in Beijing.

```
collectively ~ 集体地、共同地 -> 把很多东西收集、聚集(collect)在一起
```

In 2018 it was the NPC that amended China’s constitution to **scrap** term limits for the president.

The **spectre** of military purges will hang over this week’s meetings. More than 100 senior officers had been purged or potentially purged since 2022, a **tally** that researchers have described as “**staggering**”.

```
spectre ~ 幽灵

tally ~ 记录，得分

staggering ~ 大得惊人的，令人吃惊的 -> stagger 兼有'蹒跚'和'使震惊'两种意思，其原意是：站不稳、摇摇晃晃、快要倒了；走路摇摇晃晃、东倒西歪，就是蹒跚；被吓傻了，脑子 “站不稳”，像喝醉一样晃，就是使震惊
```

Still, the opening of the Two Sessions on Wednesday and the NPC on Thursday will be full of **pomp** and circumstance.

```
pomp ~ 盛况 / pope 教皇
```

China wants to boost its ability to domestically produce the most advanced semiconductors, **blunting** the force of US sanctions designed to hold back China’s technological progress.

```
blunting ~ 减弱 -> 使变钝(blunt)
```

Outside of political **intrigue**, this year’s Two Sessions will reveal a number of economic indicators for the year ahead.

```
intrigue ~ 密谋、阴谋 -> intrigue 兼有'密谋'和'激起兴趣'的意思，其原意是：藏着秘密、让人猜不透；密谋、搞阴谋（坏的一面）；激起兴趣、勾起好奇心（好的一面）；
```

That may be suited to what Beijing considers an uncertain geopolitical future, particularly with regards to the US. But China’s domestic problems, such as high levels of youth unemployment and an ageing society, will not be cured by a doubling down on **niche**, specialist sectors, while major other parts of the economy, such as real estate, continue to **flail**.

```
niche ~ 原意是：墙上挖出来的小凹洞、壁龛；从'墙上凹进去的小空间'引申出：生态位(生物刚好适合生存的小环境)；小众市场/细分领域(只适合一小群人的位置)

flail ~ 原意是：连枷（古代农民用来打谷子、脱粒的工具）；引申出：乱挥、乱打(疯狂、无规则地挥来挥去)
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2026/mar/05/china-gdp-growth-target-economic-slowdown

Li described 2025 as a “truly remarkable” year with “**profound** and complex developments both at home and broad”.

```
profound ~ 原意是：深度很深(pro = 向前 / 深入 + found = 底部、地基)；引申出：思想、感情上的深，即深刻的、极度的、极大的
```

Li announced a 5.5% target for urban unemployment and pledged to create more than 12m new urban jobs, targets **in line with** previous years.

```
in line with ~ 与...一致
```

Li said that “financial and economic **discipline**” was a priority for 2026.

```
discipline ~ 原意：教导、训练、教育；引申出：纪律(训练所需要的)；学科(训练的内容)；惩罚(训练中的管教)
```

Last year an editorial in state media said that consumption should be managed with the “same **rigour**” as production.

```
rigour ~ 谨慎、严谨
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2026/mar/08/chinas-foreign-minister-says-iran-war-should-never-have-happened

War in the Middle East “should never have happened”, China’s foreign minister Wang Yi has declared, even as he struck a more **conciliatory** tone with the US ahead of a highly anticipated visit by Donald Trump.

```
conciliatory ~ 安抚(cili)的、调解的、愿意和好的 / reconcile ~ 和解、和好(re + conciliate → 重新拉到一起 )
```

Recent talks between Trump and Xi Jinping, China’s president, were “**heartening**”, he said.

```
heartening ~ 令人鼓舞的、振奋人心的、让人欣慰的(heart = 心 + -en = 使… + -ing = 令人… 的)
```

It was a **markedly** different tone to last year’s press conference. This year Wang said that “sliding into conflict or confrontation could bring the whole world down” and that “neither side can **remodel** the other”.

```
markedly ~ 显著地、明显地、引人注目地(mark = 标记、明显的特征 + -ed = 有… 特征的)

remodel ~ 重新建造；改造；改建；重塑(re- = 重新 + model = 模型、塑造)
```

Both sides seem to be focused on keeping the relationship on an even **keel** ahead of the trip.

```
keel ~ 原意是：船底中间那根纵向主梁，决定船稳不稳；引申出：翻倒、倾覆 / kneel ~ 跪下
```

Both Venezuela and Iran are Chinese oil suppliers and part of Beijing’s **latticework** of global south partner countries.

```
latticework ~ 格子结构；格栅；花格工艺 / lattice ~ 格子、网格结构 / lace ~ 蕾丝；花边；系带
```

But despite condemning the US operations inside both countries, China has **stopped short of** directly criticising Trump, or delaying his trip to Beijing.

```
stop short of ~ 停在了做某事之前，没真做出来
```

Similarly, **save for** a brief **dig at** Chinese and Russian military technology, Trump made no mention of China in his sprawling **state of the union speech** last month.

```
save for ~ 等同于 except for, 除...外

dig at ~ 挖苦、嘲讽、刺儿话、抨击

state of union speech ~ （美国总统）国情咨文演说（State(状况) of the Union(联邦)）
```

Beijing “believes that a face-to-face meeting will allow them to better **gauge** Trump’s position on these issues and present the Chinese perspective more **straightforwardly**”, he added. Furthermore, China “doesn’t see much benefit to **stick** its neck out for Iran at this point”.

```
gauge ~ 判定；判断；估量；测量；测量仪器；标准；规格

straightforwardly ~ 直截了当地；坦率地；简单明了地（一直(straight)向前(forward) -> 不绕弯）

stick one's neck out ~ 把脖子伸出去；引申为：冒险；挺身而出；担风险；出头
```

Addressing reporters’ questions, Wang struck a typically **fiery** tone on Taiwan. He said that “reunification” between China and Taiwan “is a historical process that cannot be stopped” and that “those who defy it shall **perish**”.

```
fiery ~ 激烈的；暴躁的；火辣辣的；燃烧般的（fire = 火 + -y = 像… 的）

perish ~ 灭亡；消亡；死去
```

Wang also **lashed out** at Japan, whose relations with Beijing have **nosedived** since Japan’s prime minister Sanae Takaichi said an attack on Taiwan could trigger a deployment of her country’s self-defence forces.

```
lash (out) ~ 像鞭子一样抽；猛烈抽打、猛击；引申出：严厉抨击、怒斥

nosedive ~ 俯冲（nose = 机头、鼻子 + dive = 俯冲）；引申出：（数量、价格、业绩）暴跌、急剧下降
```

Wang suggested that Takaichi was using the argument of self-defence to “**hollow** out its pacifist constitution”.

```
hollow ~ 空的；中空的；空洞的；虚伪的；没有诚意的 / hollow out ~ 挖空；掏空（使… 空洞化；削弱… 的实质）
```

### US-Israel war on Iran

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2026/mar/04/us-israel-iran-war-update-latest-news-day-five

**Clerics** in Iran said they were close to choosing a successor to the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, according to state media.

```
cleric ~ 牧师、神职人员
```

No **timeframe** was given for when the funeral would take place.

```
timeframe ~ 时间表
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2026/mar/05/iran-war-briefing-israel-us-support-kurds-conflict-what-we-know-so-far-day-six

Echoing comments he made earlier this week, Trump added that the US military and Israel are “totally demolish[ing]” Iranian targets “**far ahead of schedule**”.

```
far ahead of schedule ~ 大为提前
```

“I gave instructions to provide the necessary means and ensure the presence of Ukrainian specialists who can guarantee the required **security**,” Zelenskyy wrote on X.

```
security / scrutiny(仔细观察，详细审查)
```

Iran claimed it had hit a US oil tanker in the northern **Persian** Gulf and that the vessel was on fire.

```
Persian ~ 波斯的
```

Other countries in the Gulf region continued to deal with the **fallout**.

```
fallout ~ 原意是：（核爆炸后）落下的放射性尘埃 / 辐射尘(fall-落下 + out-出来)；引申出：后果、余波、不良影响（爆炸后掉下来的坏东西）
```

Four **healthcare** workers have been killed and 25 others injured, according to the organisation.

```
healthcare ~ 原意是：对健康(health)的照料(care)；引申出：医疗保健、医疗服务
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2026/mar/05/israel-orders-people-evacuate-beirut-suburbs-lebanon-iran

The Israel Defense Forces had told all residents of the area to “save your lives and evacuate your homes immediately”, prompting an **exodus** of the Lebanese capital’s population in scenes of panic.

```
exodus ~ 原意是：往外(ex)走，典出于《圣经・出埃及记》——以色列人集体离开埃及；引申出：大批人离开、大迁徙
```

The Israeli defence minister, Israel Katz, said on Thursday that the decision to assassinate Khamenei was made in November, far **predating** the **breakdown** in the nuclear programme negotiations that Donald Trump claimed led to the US launching a preemptive strike on Iran. The original timeline was for Israel to target Khamenei in the middle of 2026 but Netanyahu moved it up the schedule after **riots** broke out in Iran, Katz said.

```
predate ~ 日期更早、发生在...之前

breakdown ~ 原意是：彻底坏掉、垮掉（break（打破、断裂） + down（向下、彻底））；引申出：机器 / 汽车抛锚；身体 / 精神崩溃；关系破裂；详细分类、明细（把整体拆碎，一项项列出来）

riot ~ 原意是：一群人失控、混乱、喧闹、暴力冲突；引申出：非常有趣（一群人闹哄哄、失控狂欢，场面热闹到爆炸、笑到失控）
```

Traffic was at a standstill throughout the city and thousands of people **resorted** to walking, with women pushing **strollers** holding **infants** through **bumper**-to-bumper traffic.

```
resort ~ 原意是：再(re)聚到一起、涌去、常去的地方；引申出：度假胜地、度假村（大家涌去、聚集放松的地方）；诉诸、凭借、最后的手段（被逼到退回去用）—— as a last resort（作为最后手段 / 万不得已）

stroller ~ 原意是：散步(stroll)的人；引申出：婴儿车、手推童车（推着宝宝慢悠悠散步用的工具）

infant ~ 原意是：不会(in)说话(fant)的婴儿 / infantry ~ 步兵（古代指年轻、没经验的小兵）
```

The Israeli military spokesperson provided preapproved routes north and east which it said people should use to flee – a tactic **reminiscent** of evacuation orders Israel issued in Gaza.

```
reminiscent ~ 原意是：使人回想起的、勾起回忆的；（re - 再、回去 + minis / memor - 记得、想起 + escent - 有...性质的）
```

Iran’s foreign minister, Abbas Araghchi, reacted with fury to the US’s sinking of Dena, accusing it of carrying out an “**atrocity** of sea”.

```
atrocity ~ 残酷、凶恶的行为
```

Iran’s retaliatory campaign of strikes has hit targets as far afield as **Cyprus**.

```
Cyprus ~ 塞浦路斯（地中海东部一岛）
```

A drone was shot down near Al Dhafra airbase in the United Arab Emirates, wounding six people when **shrapnel** fell.

```
shrapnel ~ 源自于人名 Henry Shrapnel（亨利・谢泼德），英国将军，在 18 世纪发明了一种炮弹：炮弹里装满小铅丸、小铁片，一爆炸就四处飞射；引申出：（爆炸后飞出的）弹片、碎弹片
```

Tehran denied the claims, and the general staff of the Iranian armed forces **denounced** the allegations as baseless.

```
denounce ~ 原意是：当众彻底(de)说(nounce)出来；引申出：公开指责、谴责　/ renounce ~ 原意是：公开说 “我放弃”；引申出：承诺放弃、弃绝
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/business/2026/mar/09/iran-war-oil-prices-stagflation-global-economy

Oil prices surged on Monday, triggering a stark **sell-off** across some of the world’s leading stock markets.

```
sell-off ~ （集中、恐慌性）抛售；大跌
```

According to economists, growth is **set to** weaken while prices rise. Fears of **stagflation** – where economic activity **stagnates**, but inflation increases – loom large.

```
set to ~  准备好；注定；将会；就要

stagflation ~ 滞胀：经济停滞不增长，同时物价高通胀（stagnation ＝ 停滞 + inflation = 通货膨胀） / inflation ~ 通货膨胀 / deflation ~ 通货紧缩

stagnate ~ 停滞；不发展；变萧条；（水）不流动发臭
```

About a fifth of global oil and seaborne gas tankers typically pass through the strait, making it one of the world’s most important trade **arteries**.

```
artery ~ 原意是：动脉；引申出：（交通、运输、经济的）要道、干线、命脉
```

The **lengthening** conflict has eroded the chance of prices resetting.

```
lengthening ~ 延长；变长（length = 长度 + -en = 使…（变长） + -ing = 正在…）
```

The US war on Iran is widely expected to boost inflation across the world, with a sustained rise in oil prices **rippling** through the wider economy.

```
ripple ~ 本意是：涟漪；波纹；泛起涟漪；轻轻波动；引申出：连锁反应；波及效应
```

“There’s going to be a severe and sudden short-term impact on Australian consumers’ cost of living, and their **perceptions** of their cost of living,” Hogan said.

```
perception ~ 看法；观念 / perceive ~ 感知；认为
```

Asian economies have enjoyed strong growth in industrial production, powered by the global tech boom, but an energy shock could disrupt that **momentum**.

```
momentum ~ 原意是：动量；冲力；引申出：势头；气势；动力；发展趋势（moment是一瞬间，momentum是这一瞬间产生的冲力、势头）
```

Australia is now expected to face two rate hikes this year, when just one had been **priced in** before the conflict.

```
price in ~ 原意是：把…… 算进价格里；引申出：提前预期、提前消化、提前计入
```

Traders will charge a **premium** to cover the risk of a renewed “**on-again, off-again**” conflict, he suggested.

```
premium ~ 原意是：额外的钱、奖赏、奖金；引申出：保险费；溢价、加价；优质的、高端的（花额外的钱才能得到）；稀缺、珍贵（at a premium）

on-again, off-again ~ 断断续续的，时断时续的
```

While she said it seemed unlikely the conflict would endure for another month, if it did, there would be “**material** risk of global recession”.

```
material ~ 原意是：物质、材料、实体；引申出：实在的、有实质内容的；会产生真实影响；重要的、重大的； / immaterial ~ 不重要的、无关紧要的
```

### Russia-Ukraine war

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2026/mar/04/ukraine-war-briefing-merz-tells-trump-ukraine-must-not-give-up-more-territory

“But Ukraine has to **preserve** its territory and their security interests,” Merz said at the start of his third visit to the Oval Office.

```
preserve ~ 原意是：事先(pre)保护(serve)好、不让它坏掉；引申出：保存、维护、保鲜
```

A suspected Russian “shadow fleet” oil tanker seized by Belgium is being held on a €10m ($12m) bond, after inspections revealed **infractions**, Brussels said on Tuesday. In total inspectors found 45 infractions, including technical **defects**, leading to the ship being **impounded**, it added. “The ship will only leave the port once it is **compliant** and the **deposit** has been paid,” said Belgium’s mobility minister, Jean-Luc Crucke.

```
infraction ~ 原意是：打破规则（in - 使得 + fract - 打破、断裂）；引申出：违反、违规、违法行为

defect ~ （de - 离开、向下 + fect - 做、制造）；意思包括：缺点、缺陷、毛病（没做好，有瑕疵）；叛逃、变节、投奔敌方（离开原来的队伍）

impound ~ 原意是：关进(in)围栏(pound)里；引申出：依法扣押、没收、暂扣

compliant ~ 原意是：完全(com)弯(pli)过去；引申出：遵从的、服从的、合规的

deposit ~ 原意是：往下(de)放(posit)；引申出：存放；储蓄；押金；定金；沉积；沉淀物；
```

Defence officials said the **compressed** timeline reflected lessons learned from observing drone warfare in Ukraine.

```
compressed ~ 原意是：压(press)到一起(com)；引申出：压缩的；精简的；浓缩的
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2026/mar/05/ukraine-war-briefing-putin-blames-ukraine-for-sinking-of-tanker-off-coast-of-libya

Vladimir Putin, the Russian president, has accused Ukraine of carrying out a attack on one of its liquefied natural gas (LNG) carriers, which exploded and sank into the **Mediterranean** Sea off Libya.

```
Mediterranean ~ 地中海
```

A **prolonged** energy crisis caused by the widening war in the Middle East may offer the Russian war machine an economic lifeline just as it was beginning to show signs of **strain** over its war in Ukraine. Russia could receive a **windfall** if disruption in the Middle East pushes buyers towards its energy.

```
prolonged ~ 被拉长的(pro- = 向前、往前 + long = 长) → 持续很久的、长期的

strain ~ 原意是：拉紧、用力拉扯；引申出：拉伤(拉过头)；压力(一直拉)；竭尽全力(用力拉)；过滤(用网拉)

windfall ~ 原意是：被风吹落的果子；引申出：意外之财、横财、天上掉下来的好处
```

Ukraine has said it will boycott Friday’s opening ceremony of the **Paralympics** in Milan-Cortina, Italy, over the participation of Russian athletes.

```
Paralympics ~ 与奥运会平行、并肩举办的运动会(Para + Olympics，para(llel)意为：在旁边、并肩、平行)，即残奥会
```

### EastAsia

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2026/mar/10/north-korea-nuclear-weapons-trump-iran-war

North Korea’s launch last week of a missile from a naval destroyer **elicited** an **uncharacteristically** **prosaic** analysis from the country’s leader, Kim Jong-un. The launch was proof, he said, that arming ships with nuclear weapons was “making **satisfactory** progress”.

```
elicit ~ 引出；诱出；探出（反应、回答、信息、真相）

uncharacteristically ~ 一反常态地；不典型地；与平时不同地 / characteristic ~ 典型的，特有的

prosaic ~ 平淡乏味的；平庸的；毫无诗意的；干巴巴的

satisfactory ~ 令人满意的；够好的；合格的； / satisfy ~ 使满意；满足
```

But the test, and Kim’s **mildly** upbeat **appraisal**, were designed to **reverberate** well beyond the deck of the 5,000-tonne destroyer-class vessel the Choe Hyon – the biggest warship in the North Korean fleet.

```
mildly ~ 温和地；略微；稍微；不严重地

appraisal ~ 评估；评价；估价；鉴定

reverberate ~ 回响，回荡；产生广泛反响；持续震荡； / vibrate ~ 振动、震动
```

For Kim and the dynasty that has ruled North Korea since it was founded by his grandfather in 1948, the nuclear programme is about **nothing less than** regime survival.

```
nothing less than ~ 简直就是；无异于；完全是；不折不扣的
```

North Korea is several years into a nuclear weapons programme that has gathered momentum despite UN sanctions and Trump’s attempts to use diplomacy to **rid** the Korean peninsula of nuclear weapons.

```
rid ~ 摆脱；去除；除掉
```

According to a report released in 2025, the North has assembled about 50 warheads and possesses enough **fissile** material to produce up to 40 more.

```
fissile ~ 可裂变的；易分裂的
```

The North Korean foreign ministry’s response to the war in Iran has been **nuanced**. It condemned the US and Israeli airstrikes last weekend as an “illegal act of aggression” that exposed Washington’s “hegemonic and **rogue**” instincts, but stopped short of condemning Trump by name.

```
nuanced ~ 有细微差别的；微妙的；考虑周全的

rogue ~ 失控的；离群的；危险的；不按规则来的
```

That leaves the door open to a potential resumption of nuclear talks, **contingent** on Washington dropping its demand that Pyongyang abandon its nuclear weapons and accepting it as a legitimate nuclear state.

```
contingent(on) ~ 视情况而定的；或有的；可能发生也可能不发生的； / contingency ~ 可能发生的事；意外情况；突发事件；应急事项
```

What’s less clear in the minds of analysts is whether the Iran war opens up a new opportunity for talks or pushes the North Korean regime to be more **inward looking**.

```
inward looking ~ 原意是：向内看的；引申出：闭关自守的政策、内向型政策（不对外开放、不参与国际合作、只顾自己）；（人）内向、孤僻、不与外界交流；
```

“President Trump’s willingness to use military force and threats for negotiating leverage must make Kim nervous and less likely to **hastily** seek talks,” said Seiler.

```
hastily ~ 匆忙地
```

But other analysts said Kim’s desire to secure the regime’s long-term survival – and his **rumoured** personal **rapport** with the US president – could draw him back to the negotiating table.

```
rumoured ~ 传闻的；据说的；谣传的

rapport ~ 融洽的关系；和谐；亲善；默契
```

Going into those talks as head of a state with a nuclear deterrence could give Kim the **latitude** to win concessions from Trump, including security guarantees.

```
latitude ~ 原意是：纬度；引申出：做事的空间、自由、余地
```

As the Iranian leadership is **finding to its cost**, nuclear possession – not ambition – appears to be the path to security.

```
find to one's cost ~ 付出代价后才发现；吃了亏才明白；惨痛地意识到
```

#### https://www.theguardian.com/world/2026/mar/10/china-north-korea-trains-to-resume-after-six-year-halt-following-covid-outbreak

**Passenger** train services between China and North Korea are to resume this week,.

```
passenger ~ 乘客；旅客
```

Travel agents for official ticketing **booths** in Beijing said that Chinese people were now able to buy train tickets to the diplomatically isolated nation.

```
booth ~ 小隔间；电话亭；摊位
```

However, tourists are not yet **eligible** to buy tickets.

```
eligible ~ 合格的；有资格的；符合条件的 / illegible ~ 难以辨认的，字迹模糊的 / negligible ~ 微不足道的，可以忽略的 / tangible ~ 有形的；切实的；可触摸的；真实可见的
```

“It’s great to see the international train service resuming,” said Rowan Beard, a **tours** manager at Young Pioneer Tours. He confirmed his company, one of several foreign-run firms that **specialises** in travel to North Korea, could also organise tickets from Thursday.

```
tour ~ 旅行；游览；参观；巡回演出

specialise ~ 专门从事；专攻；专门研究；专营
```

China is historically North Korea’s biggest backer and a crucial lifeline for its **moribund** economy.

```
moribund ~ 奄奄一息的；停滞不前的；濒临消亡的
```

Pyongyang’s **reclusive** authorities have given mixed signals on whether further openings are **on the cards**.

```
reclusive ~ 隐居的；不爱与人交往的；孤僻的（re- = 回、往后 + cluse = close 关闭）

on the cards ~ 很可能发生；意料之中；大有希望（cards是占卜用的牌 —— 算命牌 / 塔罗牌）
```
